The Bhagavad-gita is the best known and the most frequently translated
of Vedic religious texts. Why it should be so appealing to the Western
mind is an interesting question. It has drama, for its setting is a
scene of two great armies, banners flying, drawn up opposite one
another on the field, poised for battle. It has ambiguity, and the fact
that Arjuna and his charioteer Krsna are carrying on their dialouge
between the two armies suggests the indecision of Arjuna about the
basic question; should he enter battle against and kill those who are
friends and kinsmen? It has mystery, as Krsna demonstrates to Arjuna



His cosmic form, It has a properly complicated view of the ways of the
religious life and treats of the paths of knowledge, works, discipline
and faith and their inter-relationships, problems that have bothered
adherents of other religions in other times and places. The devotion
spoken of is a deliberate means of religious satisfaction, not a mere
outpouring of poetic emotion. Next to the Bhagavata-purana, a long work
from South India, the Gita is the text most frequently quoted in the
philosophical writings of the Gaudiya Vaisnava school, the school
represented by Swami Bhaktivedanta as the latest in a long succession
of teachers. It can be said that this school of Vaisnavism was founded,
or revived, by Sri Krsna-Caitanya Mahaprabhu (1486-1533) in Bengal, and
that it is currently the strongest single religious force in the
eastern part of the Indian subcontinent. The Gaudiya Vaisnava school,
for whom Krsna is Himself the Supreme God, and not merely an
incarnation of another deity, sees bhakti as an immediate and powerful
religious force, consisting of love between man and God. Its discipline
consists of devoting all one's actions to the Deity, and one listens to
the stories of Krsna from the sacred texts, one chants Krsna's name,
washes, bathes and dresses the murti of Krsna, feeds Him and takes the
remains of food offered to Him, thus absorbing His grace; one does
these things and many more, until one has been changed: the devotee has
become transformed into one close to Krsna, and sees the Lord face to
face.

Swami Bhaktivedanta comments upon the Gita from this point of view, and
that is legitimate. More than that, in this translation the Western
reader has the unique opportunity of seeing how a Krsna devotee
interprets his own texts. It is the Vedic exegetical tradition, justly
famous, in action. This book is then a welcome addition from many
points of view. It can serve as a valuable textbook for the college
student. It allows us to listen to a skilled interpreter explicating a
text which has profound religious meaning. It gives us insights into
the original and highly convincing ideas of the Gaudiya Vaisnava
school. In providing the Sanskrit in both Devanagari and
transliteration, it offers the Sanskrit specialist the opportunity to
re-interpret, or debate particular Sanskrit meanings--although I think
there will be little disagreement about the quality of the Swami's
Sanskrit scholarship. And finally, for the nonspecialist, there is
readable English and a devotional attitude which cannot help but move
the sensitive reader. And there are the paintings, which, incredibly as
it may seem to those familiar with contemporary Indian religious art,
were done by American devotees.

The scholar, the student of Gayudiya Vaisnavism, and the increasing
number of Western readers interested in classical Vedic thought have
been done a service by Swami Bhaktivedanta. By bringing us a new and
living interpretation of a text already known to many, he has increased
our understanding manyfold; and arguments for understanding, in these
days of estrangement, need not be made.

Professor Edward C. Dimock, Jr.

Department of South Asian Languages and Civilization
University of Chicago



To

SRILA BALADEVA VIDYABHUSANA

who presented so nicely
the "Govinda-bhasya" commentary

on

Vedanta philosophy



Preface

Originally I wrote Bhagavad-gita As It Is in the form in which it is
presented now. When this book was first published, the original
manuscript was, unfortunately, cut short to less than 400 pages,
without illustrations and without explanations for most of the original
verses of the Srimad Bhagavad-gita. In all of my other books--Srimad-
Bhagavatam, Sri Isopanisad, etc.--the system is that I give the
original verse, its English transliteration, word-for-word Sanskrit-
English equivalents, translations and purports. This makes the book
very authentic and scholarly and makes the meaning self-evident. I was
not very happy, therefore, when I had to minimize my original
manuscript. But later on, when the demand for Bhagavad-gita As It Is
considerably increased, I was requested by many scholars and devotees
to present the book in its original form, and Messrs. Macmillan and Co.
agreed to publish the complete edition. Thus the present attempt is to
offer the original manuscript of this great book of knowledge with full
parampara explanation in order to establish the Krsna consciousness
movement more soundly and progressively.

Our Krsna consciousness movement is genuine, historically authorized,
natural and transcendental due to its being based on Bhagavad-gita As
It Is. It is gradually becoming the most popular movement in the entire
world, especially amongst the younger generation. It is becoming more
and more interesting to the older generation also. Older gentlemen are
becoming interested, so much so that the fathers and grandfathers of my
disciples are encouraging us by becoming life members of our great
society, the International Society for Krishna Consciousness. In Los
Angeles many fathers and mothers used to come to see me to express
their feelings of gratitude for my leading the Krsna consciousness
movement throughout the entire world. Some of them said that it is
greatly fortunate for the Americans that I have started the Krsna
consciousness movement in America. But actually the original father of
this movement is Lord Krsna Himself, since it was started a very long
time ago but is coming down to human society by disciplic succession.
If I have any credit in this connection, it does not belong to me
personally, but it is due to my eternal spiritual master, His Divine
Grace Om Visnupada Paramahamsa Parivrajakacarya 108 Sri Srimad
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami Maharaja Prabhupada.

If personally I have any credit in this matter, it is only that I have
tried to present Bhagavad-gita as it is, without adulteration. Before
my presentation of Bhagavad-gita As It Is, almost all the English
editions of Bhagavad-gita were introduced to fulfill someone's personal
ambition. But our attempt, in presenting Bhagavad-gita As It Is, is to
present the mission of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. Our
business is to present the will of Krsna, not that of any mundane
speculator like the politician, philosopher or scientist, for they have
very little knowledge of Krsna, despite all their other knowledge. When
Krsna says, man-mana bhava mad-bhakto mad-yaji mam namaskuru, etc., we,
unlike the so-called scholars, do not say that Krsna and His inner
spirit are different. Krsna is absolute, and there is no difference
between Krsna's name, Krsna's form, Krsna's qualities, Krsna's
pastimes, etc. This absolute position of Krsna is difficult to
understand for any person who is not a devotee of Krsna in the
parampara (disciplic succession). Generally the so-called scholars,
politicians, philosophers, and svamis, without perfect knowledge of
Krsna, try to banish or kill Krsna when writing commentary on Bhagavad-



gita. Such unauthorized commentary upon Bhagavad-gita is known as
Mayavada-bhasya, and Lord Caitanya has warned us about these
unauthorized men. Lord Caitanya clearly says that anyone who tries to
understand Bhagavad-gita from the Mayavadi point of view will commit a
great blunder. The result of such a blunder will be that the misguided
student of Bhagavad-gita will certainly be bewildered on the path of
spiritual guidance and will not be able to go back to home, back to
Godhead.

Our only purpose is to present this Bhagavad-gita As It Is in order to
guide the conditioned student to the same purpose for which Krsna
descends to this planet once in a day of Brahma, or every 8,600,000,000
years. This purpose is stated in Bhagavad-gita, and we have to accept
it as it is; otherwise there is no point in trying to understand the
Bhagavad-gita and its speaker, Lord Krsna. Lord Krsna first spoke
Bhagavad-gita to the sun-god some hundreds of millions of years ago. We
have to accept this fact and thus understand the historical
significance of Bhagavad-gita, without misinterpretation, on the
authority of Krsna. To interpret Bhagavad-gita without any reference to
the will of Krsna is the greatest offense. In order to save oneself
from this offense, one has to understand the Lord as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, as He was directly understood by Arjuna, Lord
Krsna's first disciple. Such understanding of Bhagavad-gita is really
profitable and authorized for the welfare of human society in
fulfilling the mission of life.

The Krsna consciousness movement is essential in human society, for it
offers the highest perfection of life. How this is so is explained
fully in the Bhagavad-gita. Unfortunately, mundane wranglers have taken
advantage of Bhagavad-gita to push forward their demonic propensities
and mislead people regarding right understanding of the simple
principles of life. Everyone should know how God, or Krsna, is great,
and everyone should know the factual position of the living entities.
Everyone should know that a living entity is eternally a servant and
that unless one serves Krsna one has to serve illusion in different
varieties of the three modes of material nature, and thus perpetually
one has to wander within the cycle of birth and death; even the so-
called liberated Mayavadi speculator has to undergo this process. This
knowledge constitutes a great science, and each and every living being
has to hear it for his own interest.

People in general, especially in this Age of Kali, are enamored by the
external energy of Krsna, and they wrongly think that by advancement of
material comforts every man will be happy. They have no knowledge that
the material or external nature is very strong, for everyone is
strongly bound by the stringent laws of material nature. A living
entity is happily the part and parcel of the Lord, and thus his natural
function is to render immediate service to the Lord. By the spell of
illusion one tries to be happy by serving his personal sense
gratification in different forms which will never make him happy.
Instead of satisfying his own personal material senses, he has to
satisfy the senses of the Lord. That is the highest perfection of life.
The Lord wants this, and He demands it. One has to understand this
central point of Bhagavad-gita. Our Krsna consciousness movement is
teaching the whole world this central point, and because we are not
polluting the theme of Bhagavad-gita As It Is, anyone seriously
interested in deriving benefit by studying the Bhagavad-gita must take
help from the Krsna consciousness movement for practical understanding



of Bhagavad-gita under the direct guidance of the Lord. We hope,
therefore, that people will derive the greatest benefit by studying
Bhagavad-gita As It Is as we have presented it here, and if even one
man becomes a pure devotee of the Lord, we shall consider our attempt a
success.

A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami

12 May, 1971
Sydney, Australia



Introduction

om ajnana-timirandhasya
jnananjana-salakaya

caksur unmilitam yena
tasmai sri-gurave namah

sri-caitanya-mano-'bhistam
sthapitam yena bhu-tale
svayam rupah kada mahyam
dadati sva-padantikam

I was born in the darkest ignorance, and my spiritual master opened my
eyes with the torch of knowledge. I offer my respectful obeisances unto
him.

When will Srila Rupa Gosvami Prabhupada, who has established within
this material world the mission to fulfill the desire of Lord Caitanya,
give me shelter under his lotus feet?

vande 'ham sri-guroh sri-yuta-pada-kamalam sri-gurun vaisnavams ca
sri-rupam sagrajatam saha-gana-raghunathanvitam tam sa-jivam
sadvaitam savadhutam parijana-sahitam krsna-caitanya-devam
sri-radha-krsna-padan saha-gana-lalita-sri-visakhanvitams ca

I offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of my spiritual
master and unto the feet of all Vaisnavas. I offer my respectful
obeisances unto the lotus feet of Srila Rupa Gosvami along with his
elder brother Sanatana Gosvami, as well as Raghunatha Dasa and
Raghunatha Bhatta, Gopala Bhatta, and Srila Jiva Gosvami. I offer my
respectful obeisances to Lord Krsna Caitanya and Lord Nityananda along
with Advaita Acarya, Gadadhara, Srivasa, and other associates. I offer
my respectful obeisances to Srimati Radharani and Sri Krsna along with
Their associates, Sri Lalita and Visakha.

he krsna karuna-sindho
dina-bandho jagat-pate
gopesa gopika-kanta

radha-kanta namo 'stu te

O my dear Krsna, You are the friend of the distressed and the source of
creation. You are the master of the gopis and the lover of Radharani. I
offer my respectful obeisances unto You.

tapta-kancana-gaurangi
radhe vrndavanesvari
vrsabhanu-sute devi
pranamami hari-priye

I offer my respects to Radharani whose bodily complexion is like molten
gold and who is the Queen of Vrndavana. You are the daughter of King
Vrsabhanu, and You are very dear to Lord Krsna.

vancha-kalpatarubhyas ca
krpa-sindhubhya eva ca
patitanam pavanebhyo

vaisnavebhyo namo namah



I offer my respectful obeisances unto all the Vaisnava devotees of the
Lord who can fulfill the desires of everyone, just like desire trees,
and who are full of compassion for the fallen souls.

sri-krsna-caitanya
prabhu-nityananda

sri-advaita gadadhara
srivasadi-gaura-bhakta-vrnda

I offer my obeisances to Sri Krsna Caitanya, Prabhu Nityananda, Sri
Advaita, Gadadhara, Srivasa and all others in the line of devotion.

hare krsna hare krsna
krsna krsna hare hare
hare rama hare rama
rama rama hare hare

Bhagavad-gita is also known as Gitopanisad. It is the essence of Vedic
knowledge and one of the most important Upanisads in Vedic literature.
Of course there are many commentaries in English on the Bhagavad-gita,
and one may question the necessity for another one. This present
edition can be explained in the following way. Recently an American
lady asked me to recommend an English translation of Bhagavad-gita. Of
course in America there are so many editions of Bhagavad-gita available
in English, but as far as I have seen, not only in America but also in
India, none of them can be strictly said to be authoritative because in
almost every one of them the commentator has expressed his own opinions
without touching the spirit of Bhagavad-gita as it is.

The spirit of Bhagavad-gita is mentioned in Bhagavad-gita itself. It is
just like this: If we want to take a particular medicine, then we have
to follow the directions written on the label. We cannot take the
medicine according to our own whim or the direction of a friend. It
must be taken according to the directions on the label or the
directions given by a physician. Similarly, Bhagavad-gita should be
taken or accepted as it is directed by the speaker Himself. The speaker
of Bhagavad-gita is Lord Sri Krsna. He is mentioned on every page of
Bhagavad-gita as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Bhagavan. Of
course the word bhagavan sometimes refers to any powerful person or any
powerful demigod, and certainly here bhagavan designates Lord Sri Krsna
as a great personality, but at the same time we should know that Lord
Sri Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as is confirmed by all
great acaryas (spiritual masters) like Sankaracarya, Ramanujacarya,
Madhvacarya, Nimbarka Svami, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and many other
authorities of Vedic knowledge in India. The Lord Himself also
establishes Himself as the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the
Bhagavad-gita, and He is accepted as such in the Brahma-samhita and all
the Puranas, especially the Srimad-Bhagavatam, known as the Bhagavata
Purana (krsnas tu bhagavan svayam). Therefore we should take Bhagavad-
gita as it is directed by the Personality of Godhead Himself. In the
Fourth Chapter of the Gita (4.1-3) the Lord says:

imam vivasvate yogam
proktavan aham avyayam
vivasvan manave praha
manur iksvakave 'bravit

evam parampara-praptam



imam rajarsayo viduh
sa kaleneha mahata

yogo nastah parantapa

sa evayam maya te 'dya
yogah proktah puratanah
bhakto 'si me sakha ceti
rahasyam hy etad uttamam

Here the Lord informs Arjuna that this system of yoga, the Bhagavad-
gita, was first spoken to the sun-god, and the sun-god explained it to
Manu, and Manu explained it to Iksvaku, and in that way, by disciplic
succession, one speaker after another, this yoga system has been coming
down. But in the course of time it has become lost. Consequently the
Lord has to speak it again, this time to Arjuna on the Battlefield of
Kuruksetra.

He tells Arjuna that He is relating this supreme secret to him because
he is His devotee and His friend. The purport of this is that Bhagavad-
gita is a treatise which is especially meant for the devotee of the
Lord. There are three classes of transcendentalists, namely the jnani,
the yogi and the bhakta, or the impersonalist, the meditator and the
devotee. Here the Lord clearly tells Arjuna that He is making him the
first receiver of a new parampara (disciplic succession) because the
old succession was broken. It was the Lord's wish, therefore, to
establish another parampara in the same line of thought that was coming
down from the sun-god to others, and it was His wish that His teaching
be distributed anew by Arjuna. He wanted Arjuna to become the authority
in understanding the Bhagavad-gita. So we see that Bhagavad-gita is
instructed to Arjuna especially because Arjuna was a devotee of the
Lord, a direct student of Krsna, and His intimate friend. Therefore
Bhagavad-gita is best understood by a person who has qualities similar
to Arjuna's. That is to say he must be a devotee in a direct
relationship with the Lord. That is a very elaborate subject matter,
but briefly it can be stated that a devotee is in a relationship with
the Supreme Personality of Godhead in one of five different ways:

1. One may be a devotee in a passive state;
2. One may be a devotee in an active state;
3. One may be a devotee as a friend;
4. One may be a devotee as a parent;
5. One may be a devotee as a conjugal lover.

Arjuna was in a relationship with the Lord as friend. Of course there
is a gulf of difference between this friendship and the friendship
found in the material world. This is transcendental friendship which
cannot be had by everyone. Of course everyone has a particular
relationship with the Lord, and that relationship is evoked by the
perfection of devotional service. But in the present status of our
life, we have not only forgotten the Supreme Lord, but we have
forgotten our eternal relationship with the Lord. Every living being,
out of the many, many billions and trillions of living beings, has a
particular relationship with the Lord eternally. That is called
svarupa. By the process of devotional service, one can revive that
svarupa, and that stage is called svarupa-siddhi--perfection of one's
constitutional position. So Arjuna was a devotee, and he was in touch
with the Supreme Lord in friendship.



How Arjuna accepted this Bhagavad-gita should be noted. His manner of
acceptance is given in the Tenth Chapter (10.12-14):

arjuna uvaca
param brahma param dhama
pavitram paramam bhavan
purusam sasvatam divyam
adi-devam ajam vibhum

ahus tvam rsayah sarve
devarsir naradas tatha
asito devalo vyasah

svayam caiva bravisi me

sarvam etad rtam manye
yan mam vadasi kesava

na hi te bhagavan vyaktim
vidur deva na danavah

"Arjuna said: You are the Supreme Brahman, the ultimate, the supreme
abode and purifier, the Absolute Truth and the eternal Divine Person.
You are the primal God, transcendental and original, and you are the
unborn and all-pervading beauty. All the great sages like Narada,
Asita, Devala, and Vyasa proclaim this of You, and now You Yourself are
declaring it to me. O Krsna, I totally accept as truth all that You
have told me. Neither the gods nor the demons, O Lord, know Thy
personality."

After hearing Bhagavad-gita from the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Arjuna accepted Krsna as param brahma, the Supreme Brahman. Every
living being is Brahman, but the supreme living being, or the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, is the Supreme Brahman. Param dhama means that
He is the supreme rest or abode of everything; pavitram means that He
is pure, untainted by material contamination; purusam means that He is
the supreme enjoyer; sasvatam, original; divyam, transcendental; adi-
devam, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ajam, the unborn; and
vibhum, the greatest, the all-pervading.

Now one may think that because Krsna was the friend of Arjuna, Arjuna
was telling Him all this by way of flattery, but Arjuna, just to drive
out this kind of doubt from the minds of the readers of Bhagavad-gita,
substantiates these praises in the next verse when he says that Krsna
is accepted as the Supreme Personality of Godhead not only by himself
but by authorities like the sage Narada, Asita, Devala, Vyasadeva and
so on. These are great personalities who distribute the Vedic knowledge
as it is accepted by all acaryas. Therefore Arjuna tells Krsna that he
accepts whatever He says to be completely perfect. Sarvam etad rtam
manye: "I accept everything You say to be true." Arjuna also says that
the personality of the Lord is very difficult to understand and that He
cannot be known even by the great demigods. This means that the Lord
cannot even be known by personalities greater than human beings. So how
can a human being understand Sri Krsna without becoming His devotee?

Therefore Bhagavad-gita should be taken up in a spirit of devotion. One
should not think that he is equal to Krsna, nor should he think that
Krsna is an ordinary personality or even a very great personality. Lord
Sri Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, at least



theoretically, according to the statements of Bhagavad-gita or the
statements of Arjuna, the person who is trying to understand the
Bhagavad-gita. We should therefore at least theoretically accept Sri
Krsna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and with that submissive
spirit we can understand the Bhagavad-gita. Unless one reads the
Bhagavad-gita in a submissive spirit, it is very difficult to
understand Bhagavad-gita because it is a great mystery.

Just what is the Bhagavad-gita? The purpose of Bhagavad-gita is to
deliver mankind from the nescience of material existence. Every man is
in difficulty in so many ways, as Arjuna also was in difficulty in
having to fight the Battle of Kuruksetra. Arjuna surrendered unto Sri
Krsna, and consequently this Bhagavad-gita was spoken. Not only Arjuna,
but every one of us is full of anxieties because of this material
existence. Our very existence is in the atmosphere of nonexistence.
Actually we are not meant to be threatened by nonexistence. Our
existence is eternal. But somehow or other we are put into asat. Asat
refers to that which does not exist.

Out of so many human beings who are suffering, there are a few who are
actually inquiring about their position, as to what they are, why they
are put into this awkward position and so on. Unless one is awakened to
this position of questioning his suffering, unless he realizes that he
doesn't want suffering but rather wants to make a solution to all
suffering, then one is not to be considered a perfect human being.
Humanity begins when this sort of inquiry is awakened in one's mind. In
the Brahma-sutra this inquiry is called brahma jijnasa. Every activity
of the human being is to be considered a failure unless he inquires
about the nature of the Absolute. Therefore those who begin to question
why they are suffering or where they came from and where they shall go
after death are proper students for understanding Bhagavad-gita. The
sincere student should also have a firm respect for the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Such a student was Arjuna.

Lord Krsna descends specifically to reestablish the real purpose of
life when man forgets that purpose. Even then, out of many, many human
beings who awaken, there may be one who actually enters the spirit of
understanding his position, and for him this Bhagavad-gita is spoken.
Actually we are all followed by the tigress of nescience, but the Lord
is very merciful upon living entities, especially human beings. To this
end He spoke the Bhagavad-gita, making His friend Arjuna His student.

Being an associate of Lord Krsna, Arjuna was above all ignorance, but
Arjuna was put into ignorance on the Battlefield of Kuruksetra just to
question Lord Krsna about the problems of life so that the Lord could
explain them for the benefit of future generations of human beings and
chalk out the plan of life. Then man could act accordingly and perfect
the mission of human life.

The subject of the Bhagavad-gita entails the comprehension of five
basic truths. First of all, the science of God is explained and then
the constitutional position of the living entities, jivas. There is
isvara, which means controller, and there are jivas, the living
entities which are controlled. If a living entity says that he is not
controlled but that he is free, then he is insane. The living being is
controlled in every respect, at least in his conditioned life. So in
the Bhagavad-gita the subject matter deals with the isvara, the supreme
controller, and the jivas, the controlled living entities. Prakrti



(material nature) and time (the duration of existence of the whole
universe or the manifestation of material nature) and karma (activity)
are also discussed. The cosmic manifestation is full of different
activities. All living entities are engaged in different activities.
From Bhagavad-gita we must learn what God is, what the living entities
are, what prakrti is, what the cosmic manifestation is, how it is
controlled by time, and what the activities of the living entities are.

Out of these five basic subject matters in Bhagavad-gita it is
established that the Supreme Godhead, or Krsna, or Brahman, or the
supreme controller, or Paramatma--you may use whatever name you like--
is the greatest of all. The living beings are in quality like the
supreme controller. For instance, the Lord has control over the
universal affairs, over material nature, as will be explained in the
later chapters of Bhagavad-gita. Material nature is not independent.
She is acting under the directions of the Supreme Lord. As Lord Krsna
says, mayadhyaksena prakrtih suyate sa-caracaram: "This material nature
is working under My direction." When we see wonderful things happening
in the cosmic nature, we should know that behind this cosmic
manifestation there is a controller. Nothing could be manifested
without being controlled. It is childish not to consider the
controller. For instance, a child may think that an automobile is quite
wonderful to be able to run without a horse or other animal pulling it,
but a sane man knows the nature of the automobile's engineering
arrangement. He always knows that behind the machinery there is a man,
a driver. Similarly, the Supreme Lord is a driver under whose direction
everything is working. Now the jivas, or the living entities, have been
accepted by the Lord, as we will note in the later chapters, as His
parts and parcels. A particle of gold is also gold, a drop of water
from the ocean is also salty, and similarly, we the living entities,
being part and parcel of the supreme controller, isvara, or Bhagavan,
Lord Sri Krsna, have all the qualities of the Supreme Lord in minute
quantity because we are minute isvaras, subordinate isvaras. We are
trying to control nature, as presently we are trying to control space
or planets, and this tendency to control is there because it is in
Krsna. But although we have a tendency to lord it over material nature,
we should know that we are not the supreme controller. This is
explained in Bhagavad-gita.

What is material nature? This is also explained in Gita as inferior
prakrti, inferior nature. The living entity is explained as the
superior prakrti. Prakrti is always under control, whether inferior or
superior. Prakrti is female, and she is controlled by the Lord just as
the activities of a wife are controlled by the husband. Prakrti is
always subordinate, predominated by the Lord, who is the predominator.
The living entities and material nature are both predominated,
controlled by the Supreme Lord. According to the Gita, the living
entities, although parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord, are to be
considered prakrti. This is clearly mentioned in the Seventh Chapter,
Fifth Verse of Bhagavad-gita: Apareyam itas tv anyam, "This prakrti is
My lower nature," prakrtim viddhi me param jiva-bhutam maha-baho
yayedam dharyate jagat. And beyond this there is another prakrti: jiva-
bhutam, the living entity.

Prakrti itself is constituted by three qualities: the mode of goodness,
the mode of passion and the mode of ignorance. Above these modes there
is eternal time, and by a combination of these modes of nature and
under the control and purview of eternal time there are activities



which are called karma. These activities are being carried out from
time immemorial, and we are suffering or enjoying the fruits of our
activities. For instance, suppose I am a businessman and have worked
very hard with intelligence and have amassed a great bank balance. Then
I am an enjoyer. But then say I have lost all my money in business;
then I am a sufferer. Similarly, in every field of life we enjoy the
results of our work, or we suffer the results. This is called karma.

Isvara (the Supreme Lord), jiva (the living entity), prakrti (nature),
eternal time and karma (activity) are all explained in the Bhagavad-
gita. Out of these five, the Lord, the living entities, material nature
and time are eternal. The manifestation of prakrti may be temporary,
but it is not false. Some philosophers say that the manifestation of
material nature is false, but according to the philosophy of Bhagavad-
gita or according to the philosophy of the Vaisnavas, this is not so.
The manifestation of the world is not accepted as false; it is accepted
as real, but temporary. It is likened unto a cloud which moves across
the sky, or the coming of the rainy season which nourishes grains. As
soon as the rainy season is over and as soon as the cloud goes away,
all the crops which were nourished by the rain dry up. Similarly, this
material manifestation takes place at a certain interval, stays for a
while and then disappears. Such are the workings of prakrti. But this
cycle is working eternally. Therefore prakrti is eternal; it is not
false. The Lord refers to this as "My prakrti." This material nature is
the separated energy of the Supreme Lord, and similarly the living
entities are also the energy of the Supreme Lord, but they are not
separated. They are eternally related. So the Lord, the living entity,
material nature and time are all interrelated and are all eternal.
However, the other item, karma, is not eternal. The effects of karma
may be very old indeed. We are suffering or enjoying the results of our
activities from time immemorial, but we can change the results of our
karma, or our activity, and this change depends on the perfection of
our knowledge. We are engaged in various activities. Undoubtedly we do
not know what sort of activities we should adopt to gain relief from
the actions and reactions of all these activities, but this is also
explained in the Bhagavad-gita.

The position of isvara is that of supreme consciousness. The jivas, or
the living entities, being parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord, are
also conscious. Both the living entity and material nature are
explained as prakrti, the energy of the Supreme Lord, but one of the
two, the jiva, is conscious. The other prakrti is not conscious. That
is the difference. Therefore the jiva-prakrti is called superior
because the jiva has consciousness which is similar to the Lord's. The
Lord's is supreme consciousness, however, and one should not claim that
the jiva, the living entity, is also supremely conscious. The living
being cannot be supremely conscious at any stage of his perfection, and
the theory that he can be so is a misleading theory. Conscious he may
be, but he is not perfectly or supremely conscious.

The distinction between the jiva and the isvara will be explained in
the Thirteenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gita. The Lord is ksetra-jna,
conscious, as is the living being, but the living being is conscious of
his particular body, whereas the Lord is conscious of all bodies.
Because He lives in the heart of every living being, He is conscious of
the psychic movements of the particular jivas. We should not forget
this. It is also explained that the Paramatma, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, is living in everyone's heart as isvara, as the controller,



and that He is giving directions for the living entity to act as he
desires. The living entity forgets what to do. First of all he makes a
determination to act in a certain way, and then he is entangled in the
actions and reactions of his own karma. After giving up one type of
body, he enters another type of body, as we put on and take off old
clothes. As the soul thus migrates, he suffers the actions and
reactions of his past activities. These activities can be changed when
the living being is in the mode of goodness, in sanity, and understands
what sort of activities he should adopt. If he does so, then all the
actions and reactions of his past activities can be changed.
Consequently, karma is not eternal. Therefore we stated that of the
five items (isvara, jiva, prakrti, time and karma) four are eternal,
whereas karma is not eternal.

The supreme conscious isvara is similar to the living entity in this
way: both the consciousness of the Lord and that of the living entity
are transcendental. It is not that consciousness is generated by the
association of matter. That is a mistaken idea. The theory that
consciousness develops under certain circumstances of material
combination is not accepted in the Bhagavad-gita. Consciousness may be
pervertedly reflected by the covering of material circumstances, just
as light reflected through colored glass may appear to be a certain
color, but the consciousness of the Lord is not materially affected.
Lord Krsna says, mayadhyaksena prakrtih. When He descends into the
material universe, His consciousness is not materially affected. If He
were so affected, He would be unfit to speak on transcendental matters
as He does in the Bhagavad-gita. One cannot say anything about the
transcendental world without being free from materially contaminated
consciousness. So the Lord is not materially contaminated. Our
consciousness, at the present moment, however, is materially
contaminated. The Bhagavad-gita teaches that we have to purify this
materially contaminated consciousness. In pure consciousness, our
actions will be dovetailed to the will of isvara, and that will make us
happy. It is not that we have to cease all activities. Rather, our
activities are to be purified, and purified activities are called
bhakti. Activities in bhakti appear to be like ordinary activities, but
they are not contaminated. An ignorant person may see that a devotee is
acting or working like an ordinary man, but such a person with a poor
fund of knowledge does not know that the activities of the devotee or
of the Lord are not contaminated by impure consciousness or matter.
They are transcendental to the three modes of nature. We should know,
however, that at this point our consciousness is contaminated.

When we are materially contaminated, we are called conditioned. False
consciousness is exhibited under the impression that I am a product of
material nature. This is called false ego. One who is absorbed in the
thought of bodily conceptions cannot understand his situation.
Bhagavad-gita was spoken to liberate one from the bodily conception of
life, and Arjuna put himself in this position in order to receive this
information from the Lord. One must become free from the bodily
conception of life; that is the preliminary activity for the
transcendentalist. One who wants to become free, who wants to become
liberated, must first of all learn that he is not this material body.
Mukti or liberation means freedom from material consciousness. In the
Srimad-Bhagavatam also the definition of liberation is given. Muktir
hitvanyatha-rupam svarupena vyavasthitih: mukti means liberation from
the contaminated consciousness of this material world and situation in
pure consciousness. All the instructions of Bhagavad-gita are intended



to awaken this pure consciousness, and therefore we find at the last
stage of the Gita's instructions that Krsna is asking Arjuna whether he
is now in purified consciousness. Purified consciousness means acting
in accordance with the instructions of the Lord. This is the whole sum
and substance of purified consciousness. Consciousness is already there
because we are part and parcel of the Lord, but for us there is the
affinity of being affected by the inferior modes. But the Lord, being
the Supreme, is never affected. That is the difference between the
Supreme Lord and the conditioned souls.

What is this consciousness? This consciousness is "I am." Then what am
I? In contaminated consciousness "I am" means "I am the lord of all I
survey. I am the enjoyer." The world revolves because every living
being thinks that he is the lord and creator of the material world.
Material consciousness has two psychic divisions. One is that I am the
creator, and the other is that I am the enjoyer. But actually the
Supreme Lord is both the creator and the enjoyer, and the living
entity, being part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, is neither the
creator nor the enjoyer, but a cooperator. He is the created and the
enjoyed. For instance, a part of a machine cooperates with the whole
machine; a part of the body cooperates with the whole body. The hands,
feet, eyes, legs and so on are all parts of the body, but they are not
actually the enjoyers. The stomach is the enjoyer. The legs move, the
hands supply food, the teeth chew, and all parts of the body are
engaged in satisfying the stomach because the stomach is the principal
factor that nourishes the body's organization. Therefore everything is
given to the stomach. One nourishes the tree by watering its root, and
one nourishes the body by feeding the stomach, for if the body is to be
kept in a healthy state, then the parts of the body must cooperate to
feed the stomach. Similarly, the Supreme Lord is the enjoyer and the
creator, and we, as subordinate living beings, are meant to cooperate
to satisfy Him. This cooperation will actually help us, just as food
taken by the stomach will help all other parts of the body. If the
fingers of the hand think that they should take the food themselves
instead of giving it to the stomach, then they will be frustrated. The
central figure of creation and of enjoyment is the Supreme Lord, and
the living entities are cooperators. By cooperation they enjoy. The
relation is also like that of the master and the servant. If the master
is fully satisfied, then the servant is satisfied. Similarly, the
Supreme Lord should be satisfied, although the tendency to become the
creator and the tendency to enjoy the material world are there also in
the living entities because these tendencies are there in the Supreme
Lord who has created the manifested cosmic world.

We shall find, therefore, in this Bhagavad-gita that the complete whole
is comprised of the supreme controller, the controlled living entities,
the cosmic manifestation, eternal time and karma, or activities, and
all of these are explained in this text. All of these taken completely
form the complete whole, and the complete whole is called the Supreme
Absolute Truth. The complete whole and the complete Absolute Truth are
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna. All manifestations are
due to His different energies. He is the complete whole.

It is also explained in the Gita that impersonal Brahman is also
subordinate to the complete (brahmano hi pratisthaham). Brahman is more
explicitly explained in the Brahma-sutra to be like the rays of the
sunshine. The impersonal Brahman is the shining rays of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Impersonal Brahman is incomplete realization of



the absolute whole, and so also is the conception of Paramatma in the
Twelfth Chapter. There it shall be seen that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Purusottama, is above both impersonal Brahman and the partial
realization of Paramatma. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is called
sac-cid-ananda-vigraha. The Brahma-samhita begins in this way: isvarah
paramah krsnah sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah. anadir adir govindah sarva-
karana-karanam. "Krsna, is the cause of all causes. He is the primal
cause, and He is the very form of eternity, knowledge and bliss."
Impersonal Brahman realization is the realization of His sat (being)
feature. Paramatma realization is the realization of cit (eternal
knowledge). But realization of the Personality of Godhead, Krsna, is
realization of all the transcendental features: sat, cit and ananda
(being, knowledge, bliss) in complete vigraha (form).

People with less intelligence consider the Supreme Truth to be
impersonal, but He is a transcendental person, and this is confirmed in
all Vedic literatures. Nityo nityanam cetanas cetananam. (Katha
Upanisad 2.2.13) As we are all individual living beings and have our
individuality, the Supreme Absolute Truth is also, in the ultimate
issue, a person, and realization of the Personality of Godhead is
realization of all of the transcendental features. The complete whole
is not formless. If He is formless, or if He is less than any other
thing, then He cannot be the complete whole. The complete whole must
have everything within our experience and beyond our experience,
otherwise it cannot be complete. The complete whole, Personality of
Godhead, has immense potencies (parasya saktir vividhaiva sruyate).

How Krsna is acting in different potencies is also explained in
Bhagavad-gita. This phenomenal world or material world in which we are
placed is also complete in itself because the twenty-four elements of
which this material universe is a temporary manifestation, according to
Sankhya philosophy, are completely adjusted to produce complete
resources which are necessary for the maintenance and subsistence of
this universe. There is nothing extraneous; nor is there anything
needed. This manifestation has its own time fixed by the energy of the
supreme whole, and when its time is complete, these temporary
manifestations will be annihilated by the complete arrangement of the
complete. There is complete facility for the small complete units,
namely the living entities, to realize the complete, and all sorts of
incompleteness are experienced due to incomplete knowledge of the
complete. So Bhagavad-gita contains the complete knowledge of Vedic
wisdom.

All Vedic knowledge is infallible, and Hindus accept Vedic knowledge to
be complete and infallible. For example, cow dung is the stool of an
animal, and according to smrti, or Vedic injunction, if one touches the
stool of an animal he has to take a bath to purify himself. But in the
Vedic scriptures cow dung is considered to be a purifying agent. One
might consider this to be contradictory, but it is accepted because it
is Vedic injunction, and indeed by accepting this, one will not commit
a mistake; subsequently it has been proved by modern science that cow
dung contains all antiseptic properties. So Vedic knowledge is complete
because it is above all doubts and mistakes, and Bhagavad-gita is the
essence of all Vedic knowledge.

Vedic knowledge is not a question of research. Our research work is
imperfect because we are researching things with imperfect senses. We
have to accept perfect knowledge which comes down, as is stated in



Bhagavad-gita, by the parampara (disciplic succession). We have to
receive knowledge from the proper source in disciplic succession
beginning with the supreme spiritual master, the Lord Himself, and
handed down to a succession of spiritual masters. Arjuna, the student
who took lessons from Lord Sri Krsna, accepts everything that He says
without contradicting Him. One is not allowed to accept one portion of
Bhagavad-gita and not another. No. We must accept Bhagavad-gita without
interpretation, without deletion and without our own whimsical
participation in the matter. The Gita should be taken as the most
perfect presentation of Vedic knowledge. Vedic knowledge is received
from transcendental sources, and the first words were spoken by the
Lord Himself. The words spoken by the Lord are called apauruseya,
meaning that they are different from words spoken by a person of the
mundane world who is infected with four defects. A mundaner is 1) is
sure to commit mistakes, 2) is invariably illusioned, 3) has the
tendency to cheat others and 4) is limited by imperfect senses. With
these four imperfections, one cannot deliver perfect information of
all-pervading knowledge.

Vedic knowledge is not imparted by such defective living entities. It
was imparted unto the heart of Brahma, the first created living being,
and Brahma in his turn disseminated this knowledge to his sons and
disciples, as he originally received it from the Lord. The Lord is
purnam, all-perfect, and there is no possibility of His becoming
subjected to the laws of material nature. One should therefore be
intelligent enough to know that the Lord is the only proprietor of
everything in the universe and that He is the original creator, the
creator of Brahma. In the Eleventh Chapter the Lord is addressed as
prapitamaha because Brahma is addressed as pitamaha, the grandfather,
and He is the creator of the grandfather. So no one should claim to be
the proprietor of anything; one should accept only things which are set
aside for him by the Lord as his quota for his maintenance.

There are many examples given of how we are to utilize those things
which are set aside for us by the Lord. This is also explained in
Bhagavad-gita. In the beginning, Arjuna decided that he should not
fight in the Battle of Kuruksetra. This was his own decision. Arjuna
told the Lord that it was not possible for him to enjoy the kingdom
after killing his own kinsmen. This decision was based on the body
because he was thinking that the body was himself and that his bodily
relations or expansions were his brothers, nephews, brothers-in-law,
grandfathers and so on. He was thinking in this way to satisfy his
bodily demands. Bhagavad-gita was spoken by the Lord just to change
this view, and at the end Arjuna decides to fight under the directions
of the Lord when he says, karisye vacanam tava: "I shall act according
to Thy word."

In this world man is not meant to toil like hogs. He must be
intelligent to realize the importance of human life and refuse to act
like an ordinary animal. A human being should realize the aim of his
life, and this direction is given in all Vedic literatures, and the
essence is given in Bhagavad-gita. Vedic literature is meant for human
beings, not for animals. Animals can kill other living animals, and
there is no question of sin on their part, but if a man kills an animal
for the satisfaction of his uncontrolled taste, he must be responsible
for breaking the laws of nature. In the Bhagavad-gita it is clearly
explained that there are three kinds of activities according to the
different modes of nature: the activities of goodness, of passion and



of ignorance. Similarly, there are three kinds of eatables also:
eatables in goodness, passion and ignorance. All of this is clearly
described, and if we properly utilize the instructions of Bhagavad-
gita, then our whole life will become purified, and ultimately we will
be able to reach the destination which is beyond this material sky.

That destination is called the sanatana sky, the eternal spiritual sky.
In this material world we find that everything is temporary. It comes
into being, stays for some time, produces some by-products, dwindles
and then vanishes. That is the law of the material world, whether we
use as an example this body, or a piece of fruit or anything. But
beyond this temporary world there is another world of which we have
information. This world consists of another nature, which is sanatana,
eternal. Jiva is also described as sanatana, eternal, and the Lord is
also described as sanatana in the Eleventh Chapter. We have an intimate
relationship with the Lord, and because we are all qualitatively one--
the sanatana-dhama, or sky, the sanatana Supreme Personality and the
sanatana living entities--the whole purpose of Bhagavad-gita is to
revive our sanatana occupation, or sanatana-dharma, which is the
eternal occupation of the living entity. We are temporarily engaged in
different activities, but all of these activities can be purified when
we give up all these temporary activities and take up the activities
which are prescribed by the Supreme Lord. That is called our pure life.

The Supreme Lord and His transcendental abode are both sanatana, as are
the living entities, and the combined association of the Supreme Lord
and the living entities in the sanatana abode is the perfection of
human life. The Lord is very kind to the living entities because they
are His sons. Lord Krsna declares in Bhagavad-gita, sarva-yonisu...
aham bija-pradah pita: "I am the father of all." Of course there are
all types of living entities according to their various karmas, but
here the Lord claims that He is the father of all of them. Therefore
the Lord descends to reclaim all of these fallen, conditioned souls to
call them back to the sanatana eternal sky so that the sanatana living
entities may regain their eternal sanatana positions in eternal
association with the Lord. The Lord comes Himself in different
incarnations, or He sends His confidential servants as sons or His
associates or acaryas to reclaim the conditioned souls.

Therefore, sanatana-dharma does not refer to any sectarian process of
religion. It is the eternal function of the eternal living entities in
relationship with the eternal Supreme Lord. Sanatana-dharma refers, as
stated previously, to the eternal occupation of the living entity.
Ramanujacarya has explained the word sanatana as "that which has
neither beginning nor end," so when we speak of sanatana-dharma, we
must take it for granted on the authority of Sri Ramanujacarya that it
has neither beginning nor end.

The English world religion is a little different from sanatana-dharma.
Religion conveys the idea of faith, and faith may change. One may have
faith in a particular process, and he may change this faith and adopt
another, but sanatana-dharma refers to that activity which cannot be
changed. For instance, liquidity cannot be taken from water, nor can
heat be taken from fire. Similarly, the eternal function of the eternal
living entity cannot be taken from the living entity. Sanatana-dharma
is eternally integral with the living entity. When we speak of
sanatana-dharma, therefore, we must take it for granted on the
authority of Sri Ramanujacarya that it has neither beginning nor end.



That which has neither end nor beginning must not be sectarian, for it
cannot be limited by any boundaries. Those belonging to some sectarian
faith will wrongly consider that sanatana-dharma is also sectarian, but
if we go deeply into the matter and consider it in the light of modern
science, it is possible for us to see that sanatana-dharma is the
business of all the people of the world--nay, of all the living
entities of the universe.

Non-sanatana religious faith may have some beginning in the annals of
human history, but there is no beginning to the history of sanatana-
dharma because it remains eternally with the living entities. Insofar
as the living entities are concerned, the authoritative sastras state
that the living entity has neither birth nor death. In the Gita it is
stated that the living entity is never born, and he never dies. He is
eternal and indestructible, and he continues to live after the
destruction of his temporary material body. In reference to the concept
of sanatana-dharma, we must try to understand the concept of religion
from the Sanskrit root meaning of the word. Dharma refers to that which
is constantly existing with a particular object. We conclude that there
is heat and light along with the fire; without heat and light, there is
no meaning to the word fire. Similarly, we must discover the essential
part of the living being, that part which is his constant companion.
That constant companion is his eternal quality, and that eternal
quality is his eternal religion.

When Sanatana Gosvami asked Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu about the svarupa
of every living being, the Lord replied that the svarupa or
constitutional position of the living being is the rendering of service
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If we analyze this statement of
Lord Caitanya's, we can easily see that every living being is
constantly engaged in rendering service to another living being. A
living being serves other living beings in two capacities. By doing so,
the living entity enjoys life. The lower animals serve human beings as
servants serve their master. A serves B master, B serves C master and C
serves D master and so on. Under these circumstances, we can see that
one friend serves another friend, the mother serves the son, the wife
serves the husband, the husband serves the wife and so on. If we go on
searching in this spirit, it will be seen that there is no exception in
the society of living beings to the activity of service. The politician
presents his manifesto for the public to convince them of his capacity
for service. The voters therefore give the politician their valuable
votes, thinking that he will render valuable service to society. The
shopkeeper serves the customer, and the artisan serves the capitalist.
The capitalist serves the family, and the family serves the state in
the terms of the eternal capacity of the eternal living being. In this
way we can see that no living being is exempt from rendering service to
other living beings, and therefore we can safely conclude that service
is the constant companion of the living being and that the rendering of
service is the eternal religion of the living being.

Yet man professes to belong to a particular type of faith with
reference to particular time and circumstance and thus claims to be a
Hindu, Muslim, Christian, Buddhist or any other sect. Such designations
are non-sanatana-dharma. A Hindu may change his faith to become a
Muslim, or a Muslim may change his faith to become a Hindu, or a
Christian may change his faith and so on. But in all circumstances the
change of religious faith does not affect the eternal occupation of
rendering service to others. The Hindu, Muslim or Christian in all



circumstances is servant of someone. Thus, to profess a particular type
of sect is not to profess one's sanatana-dharma. The rendering of
service is sanatana-dharma.

Factually we are related to the Supreme Lord in service. The Supreme
Lord is the supreme enjoyer, and we living entities are His servitors.
We are created for His enjoyment, and if we participate in that eternal
enjoyment with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, we become happy. We
cannot become happy otherwise. It is not possible to be happy
independently, just as no one part of the body can be happy without
cooperating with the stomach. It is not possible for the living entity
to be happy without rendering transcendental loving service unto the
Supreme Lord.

In the Bhagavad-gita, worship of different demigods or rendering
service to them is not approved. It is stated in the Seventh Chapter,
twentieth verse:

kamais tais tair hrta-jnanah
prapadyante 'nya-devatah
tam tam niyamam asthaya
prakrtya niyatah svaya

"Those whose minds are distorted by material desires surrender unto
demigods and follow the particular rules and regulations of worship
according to their own natures." Here it is plainly said that those who
are directed by lust worship the demigods and not the Supreme Lord
Krsna. When we mention the name Krsna, we do not refer to any sectarian
name. Krsna means the highest pleasure, and it is confirmed that the
Supreme Lord is the reservoir or storehouse of all pleasure. We are all
hankering after pleasure. Ananda-mayo 'bhyasat (Vedanta-sutra 1.1.12).
The living entities, like the Lord, are full of consciousness, and they
are after happiness. The Lord is perpetually happy, and if the living
entities associate with the Lord, cooperate with Him and take part in
His association, then they also become happy.

The Lord descends to this mortal world to show His pastimes in
Vrndavana, which are full of happiness. When Lord Sri Krsna was in
Vrndavana, His activities with His cowherd boyfriends, with His damsel
friends, with the inhabitants of Vrndavana and with the cows were all
full of happiness. The total population of Vrndavana knew nothing but
Krsna. But Lord Krsna even discouraged His father Nanda Maharaja from
worshiping the demigod Indra because He wanted to establish the fact
that people need not worship any demigod. They need only worship the
Supreme Lord because their ultimate goal is to return to His abode.

The abode of Lord Sri Krsna is described in the Bhagavad-gita,
Fifteenth Chapter, sixth verse:

na tad bhasayate suryo
na sasanko na pavakah
yad gatva na nivartante
tad dhama paramam mama

"That abode of Mine is not illumined by the sun or moon, nor by
electricity and anyone who reaches it never comes back to this material
world."



This verse gives a description of that eternal sky. Of course we have a
material conception of the sky, and we think of it in relationship to
the sun, moon, stars and so on, but in this verse the Lord states that
in the eternal sky there is no need for the sun nor for the moon nor
fire of any kind because the spiritual sky is already illuminated by
the brahmajyoti, the rays emanating from the Supreme Lord. We are
trying with difficulty to reach other planets, but it is not difficult
to understand the abode of the Supreme Lord. This abode is referred to
as Goloka. In the Brahma-samhita (5.37) it is beautifully described:
goloka eva nivasaty akhilatma-bhutah. The Lord resides eternally in His
abode Goloka, yet He can be approached from this world, and to this end
the Lord comes to manifest His real form, sac-cid-ananda-vigraha. When
He manifests this form, there is no need for our imagining what He
looks like. To discourage such imaginative speculation, He descends and
exhibits Himself as He is, as Syamasundara. Unfortunately, the less
intelligent deride Him because He comes as one of us and plays with us
as a human being. But because of this we should not consider that the
Lord is one of us. It is by His omnipotency that He presents Himself in
His real form before us and displays His pastimes, which are prototypes
of those pastimes found in His abode.

In the effulgent rays of the spiritual sky there are innumerable
planets floating. The brahmajyoti emanates from the supreme abode,
Krsnaloka, and the anandamaya-cinmaya planets, which are not material,
float in those rays. The Lord says, na tad bhasayate suryo na sasanko
na pavakah. yad gatva na nivartante tad dhama paramam mama. One who can
approach that spiritual sky is not required to descend again to the
material sky. In the material sky, even if we approach the highest
planet (Brahmaloka), what to speak of the moon, we will find the same
conditions of life, namely birth, death, disease and old age. No planet
in the material universe is free from these four principles of material
existence. Therefore the Lord says in Bhagavad-gita, abrahma-bhuvanal
lokah punar avartino 'rjuna. The living entities are traveling from one
planet to another, not by a mechanical arrangement but by a spiritual
process. This is also mentioned: yanti deva-vrata devan pitrn yanti
pitr-vratah. No mechanical arrangement is necessary if we want
interplanetary travel. The Gita instructs: yanti deva-vrata devan. The
moon, the sun and higher planets are called Svargaloka. There are three
different statuses of planets: higher, middle and lower planetary
systems. The earth belongs to the middle planetary system. Bhagavad-
gita informs us how to travel to the higher planetary systems
(Devaloka) with a very simple formula: yanti deva-vrata devan. One need
only worship the particular demigod of that particular planet and in
that way go to the moon, the sun or any of the higher planetary
systems.

Yet Bhagavad-gita does not advise us to go to any of the planets in
this material world because even if we go to Brahmaloka, the highest
planet, through some sort of mechanical contrivance by maybe traveling
for forty thousand years (and who would live that long?), we will still
find the material inconveniences of birth, death, disease and old age.
But one who wants to approach the supreme planet, Krsnaloka, or any of
the other planets within the spiritual sky, will not meet with these
material inconveniences. Amongst all of the planets in the spiritual
sky there is one supreme planet called Goloka Vrndavana, which is the
original planet in the abode of the original Personality of Godhead Sri
Krsna. All of this information is given in Bhagavad-gita, and we are



given through its instruction information how to leave the material
world and begin a truly blissful life in the spiritual sky.

In the Fifteenth Chapter of the Bhagavad-gita, the real picture of the
material world is given. It is said there:

urdhva-mulam adhah-sakham
asvattham prahur avyayam
chandamsi yasya parnani
yas tam veda sa veda-vit

"The Supreme Lord said: There is a banyan tree which has its  roots
upward and its branches down, and the Vedic hymns are its leaves. One
who knows this tree is the knower of the Vedas." (Bg 15.1) Here the
material world is described as a tree whose roots are upwards and
branches are below. We have experience of a tree whose roots are
upward: if one stands on the bank of a river or any reservoir of water,
he can see that the trees reflected in the water are upside down. The
branches go downward and the roots upward. Similarly, this material
world is a reflection of the spiritual world. The material world is but
a shadow of reality. In the shadow there is no reality or
substantiality, but from the shadow we can understand that there is
substance and reality. In the desert there is no water, but the mirage
suggests that there is such a thing as water. In the material world
there is no water, there is no happiness, but the real water of actual
happiness is there in the spiritual world.

The Lord suggests that we attain the spiritual world in the following
manner (Bg. 15.5):

nirmana-moha jita-sanga-dosa
adhyatma-nitya vinivrtta-kamah

dvandvair vimuktah sukha-duhkha-samjnair
gacchanty amudhah padam avyayam tat

That padam avyayam or eternal kingdom can be reached by one who is
nirmana-moha. What does this mean? We are after designations. Someone
wants to become "sir," someone wants to become "lord," someone wants to
become the president or a rich man or a king or something else. As long
as we are attached to these designations, we are attached to the body
because designations belong to the body. But we are not these bodies,
and realizing this is the first stage in spiritual realization. We are
associated with the three modes of material nature, but we must become
detached through devotional service to the Lord. If we are not attached
to devotional service to the Lord, then we cannot become detached from
the modes of material nature. Designations and attachments are due to
our lust and desire, our wanting to lord it over the material nature.
As long as we do not give up this propensity of lording it over
material nature, there is no possibility of returning to the kingdom of
the Supreme, the sanatana-dhama. That eternal kingdom, which is never
destroyed, can be approached by one who is not bewildered by the
attractions of false material enjoyments, who is situated in the
service of the Supreme Lord. One so situated can easily approach that
supreme abode.

Elsewhere in the Gita (8.21) it is stated:

avyakto 'ksara ity uktas



tam ahuh paramam gatim
yam prapya na nivartante
tad dhama paramam mama

Avyakta means unmanifested. Not even all of the material world is
manifested before us. Our senses are so imperfect that we cannot even
see all of the stars within this material universe. In Vedic literature
we can receive much information about all the planets, and we can
believe it or not believe it. All of the important planets are
described in Vedic literatures, especially Srimad-Bhagavatam, and the
spiritual world, which is beyond this material sky, is described as
avyakta, unmanifested. One should desire and hanker after that supreme
kingdom, for when one attains that kingdom, he does not have to return
to this material world.

Next, one may raise the question of how one goes about approaching that
abode of the Supreme Lord. Information of this is given in the Eighth
Chapter. It is said there:

anta-kale ca mam eva
smaran muktva kalevaram

yah prayati sa mad-bhavam
yati nasty atra samsayah

"Anyone who quits his body, at the end of life, remembering Me, attains
immediately to My nature; and there is no doubt of this." (Bg. 8.5) One
who thinks of Krsna at the time of his death goes to Krsna. One must
remember the form of Krsna; if he quits his body thinking of this form,
he approaches the spiritual kingdom. Mad-bhavam refers to the supreme
nature of the Supreme Being. The Supreme Being is sac-cid-ananda-
vigraha--eternal, full of knowledge and bliss. Our present body is not
sac-cid-ananda. It is asat, not sat. It is not eternal; it is
perishable. It is not cit, full of knowledge, but it is full of
ignorance. We have no knowledge of the spiritual kingdom, nor do we
even have perfect knowledge of this material world where there are so
many things unknown to us. The body is also nirananda; instead of being
full of bliss it is full of misery. All of the miseries we experience
in the material world arise from the body, but one who leaves this body
thinking of the Supreme Personality of Godhead at once attains a sac-
cid-ananda body, as is promised in the fifth verse of the Eight Chapter
where Lord Krsna says, "He attains My nature."

The process of quitting this body and getting another body in the
material world is also organized. A man dies after it has been decided
what form of body he will have in the next life. Higher authorities,
not the living entity himself, make this decision. According to our
activities in this life, we either rise or sink. This life is a
preparation for the next life. If we can prepare, therefore, in this
life to get promotion to the kingdom of God, then surely, after
quitting this material body, we will attain a spiritual body just like
the Lord's.

As explained before, there are different kinds of transcendentalists,
the brahma-vadi, paramatma-vadi, and the devotee, and, as mentioned, in
the brahmajyoti (spiritual sky) there are innumerable spiritual
planets. The number of these planets is far, far greater than all of
the planets of this material world. This material world has been
approximated as only one quarter of the creation (ekamsena sthito



jagat). In this material segment there are millions and billions of
universes with trillions of planets and suns, stars and moons. But this
whole material creation is only a fragment of the total creation. Most
of the creation is in the spiritual sky. One who desires to merge into
the existence of the Supreme Brahman is at once transferred to the
brahmajyoti of the Supreme Lord and thus attains the spiritual sky. The
devotee, who wants to enjoy the association of the Lord, enters into
the Vaikuntha planets, which are innumerable, and the Supreme Lord by
His plenary expansions as Narayana with four hands and with different
names like Pradyumna, Aniruddha, Govinda, etc., associates with him
there. Therefore at the end of life the transcendentalists either think
of the brahmajyoti, the Paramatma or the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Sri Krsna. In all cases they enter into the spiritual sky, but only the
devotee, or he who is in personal touch with the Supreme Lord, enters
into the Vaikuntha planets. The Lord further adds that of this "there
is no doubt." This must be believed firmly. We should not reject that
which does not tally with our imagination; our attitude should be that
of Arjuna: "I believe everything that You have said." Therefore when
the Lord says that at the time of death whoever thinks of Him as
Brahman or Paramatma or as the Personality of Godhead certainly enters
into the spiritual sky, there is no doubt about it. There is no
question of disbelieving it.

The information on how to think of the Supreme Being at the time of
death is also given in the Gita (8.6):

yam yam vapi smaran bhavam
tyajaty ante kalevaram
tam tam evaiti kaunteya
sada tad-bhava-bhavitah

"In whatever condition one quits his present body, in his next life he
will attain to that state of being without fail." Material nature is a
display of one of the energies of the Supreme Lord. In the Visnu Purana
(6.7.61) the total energies of the Supreme Lord are delineated:

visnu-saktih para prokta
ksetra-jnakhya tatha para
avidya-karma-samjnanya
trtiya saktir isyate

The Supreme Lord has diverse and innumerable energies which are beyond
our conception; however, great learned sages or liberated souls have
studied these energies and have analyzed them into three parts. All of
the energies are of visnu-sakti, that is to say they are different
potencies of Lord Visnu. That energy is para, transcendental. Living
entities also belong to the superior energy, as has already been
explained. The other energies, or material energies, are in the mode of
ignorance. At the time of death we can either remain in the inferior
energy of this material world, or we can transfer to the energy of the
spiritual world.

In life we are accustomed to thinking either of the material or the
spiritual energy. There are so many literatures which fill our thoughts
with the material energy--newspapers, magazines, novels, etc. Our
thinking, which is now absorbed in these literatures, must be
transferred to the Vedic literatures. The great sages, therefore, have
written so many Vedic literatures such as the Puranas, etc. The Puranas



are not imaginative; they are historical records. In the Caitanya-
caritamrta (Madhya 20.122) there is the following verse:

maya-mugdha jivera nahi svatah krsna-jnana
jivere krpaya kaila krsna veda-purana

The forgetful living entities or conditioned souls have forgotten their
relationship with the Supreme Lord, and they are engrossed in thinking
of material activities. Just to transfer their thinking power to the
spiritual sky, Krsna-dvaipayana Vyasa has given a great number of Vedic
literatures. First he divided the Vedas into four, then he explained
them in the Puranas, and for less capable people he wrote the
Mahabharata. In the Mahabharata there is given the Bhagavad-gita. Then
all Vedic literature is summarized in the Vedanta-sutra, and for future
guidance he gave a natural commentation on the Vedanta-sutra, called
Srimad-Bhagavatam. We must always engage our minds in reading these
Vedic literatures. Just as materialists engage their minds in reading
newspapers, magazines and so many materialistic literatures, we must
transfer our reading to these literatures which are given to us by
Vyasadeva; in that way it will be possible for us to remember the
Supreme Lord at the time of death. That is the only way suggested by
the Lord, and He guarantees the result: "There is no doubt."

tasmat sarvesu kalesu
mam anusmara yudhya ca
mayy arpita-mano-buddhir
mam evaisyasy asamsayah

"Therefore, Arjuna, you should always think of Me, and at the same time
you should continue your prescribed duty and fight. With your mind and
activities always fixed on Me and everything engaged in Me, you will
attain to Me without any doubt." (Bg. 8.7)

He does not advise Arjuna to simply remember Him and give up his
occupation. No, the Lord never suggests anything impractical. In this
material world, in order to maintain the body one has to work. Human
society is divided, according to work, into four divisions of social
order--brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya, sudra. The brahmana class or
intelligent class is working in one way, the ksatriya or administrative
class is working in another way, and the mercantile class and the
laborers are all tending to their specific duties. In the human
society, whether one is a laborer, merchant, warrior, administrator, or
farmer, or even if one belongs to the highest class and is a literary
man, a scientist or a theologian, he has to work in order to maintain
his existence. The Lord therefore tells Arjuna that he need not give up
his occupation, but while he is engaged in his occupation he should
remember Krsna (mam anusmara). If he doesn't practice remembering Krsna
while he is struggling for existence, then it will not be possible for
him to remember Krsna at the time of death. Lord Caitanya also advises
this. He says, kirtaniyah sada harih: one should practice remembering
the Lord by chanting the names of the Lord always. The names of the
Lord and the Lord are nondifferent. So Lord Krsna's instructions to
Arjuna to "remember Me" and Lord Caitanya's injunction to "always chant
the names of Lord Krsna" are the same instruction. There is no
difference, because Krsna and Krsna's name are nondifferent. In the
absolute status there is no difference between reference and referent.
Therefore we have to practice remembering the Lord always, twenty-four



hours a day, by chanting His names and molding our life's activities in
such a way that we can remember Him always.

How is this possible? The acaryas give the following example. If a
married woman is attached to another man, or if a man has an attachment
for a woman other than his wife, then the attachment is to be
considered very strong. One with such an attachment is always thinking
of the loved one. The wife who is thinking of her lover is always
thinking of meeting him, even while she is carrying out her household
chores. In fact, she carries out her household work even more carefully
so her husband will not suspect her attachment. Similarly, we should
always remember the supreme lover, Sri Krsna, and at the same time
perform our material duties very nicely. A strong sense of love is
required here. If we have a strong sense of love for the Supreme Lord,
then we can discharge our duty and at the same time remember Him. But
we have to develop that sense of love. Arjuna, for instance, was always
thinking of Krsna; he was the constant companion of Krsna, and at the
same time he was a warrior. Krsna did not advise him to give up
fighting and go to the forest to meditate. When Lord Krsna delineates
the yoga system to Arjuna, Arjuna says that the practice of this system
is not possible for him.

arjuna uvaca
yo 'yam yogas tvaya proktah

samyena madhusudana
etasyaham na pasyami

cancalatvat sthitim sthiram

"Arjuna said, O Madhusudana, the system of yoga which You have
summarized appears impractical and unendurable to me, for the mind is
restless and unsteady." (Bg. 6.33)

But the Lord says:

yoginam api sarvesam
mad-gatenantaratmana

sraddhavan bhajate yo mam
sa me yuktatamo matah

"Of all yogis, he who always abides in Me with great faith, worshiping
Me in transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with Me
in yoga, and is the highest of all." (Bg. 6.47) So one who thinks of
the Supreme Lord always is the greatest yogi, the supermost jnani, and
the greatest devotee at the same time. The Lord further tells Arjuna
that as a ksatriya he cannot give up his fighting, but if Arjuna fights
remembering Krsna, then he will be able to remember Him at the time of
death. But one must be completely surrendered in the transcendental
loving service of the Lord.

We work not with our body, actually, but with our mind and
intelligence. So if the intelligence and the mind are always engaged in
the thought of the Supreme Lord, then naturally the senses are also
engaged in His service. Superficially, at least, the activities of the
senses remain the same, but the consciousness is changed. The Bhagavad-
gita teaches one how to absorb the mind and intelligence in the thought
of the Lord. Such absorption will enable one to transfer himself to the
kingdom of the Lord. If the mind is engaged in Krsna's service, then
the senses are automatically engaged in His service. This is the art,



and this is also the secret of Bhagavad-gita: total absorption in the
thought of Sri Krsna.

Modern man has struggled very hard to reach the moon, but he has not
tried very hard to elevate himself spiritually. If one has fifty years
of life ahead of him, he should engage that brief time in cultivating
this practice of remembering the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This
practice is the devotional process of:

sravanam kirtanam visnoh
smaranam pada-sevanam
arcanam vandanam dasyam
sakhyam atma-nivedanam

(Srimad-Bhagavatam 7.5.23)

These nine processes, of which the easiest is sravanam, hearing
Bhagavad-gita from the realized person, will turn one to the thought of
the Supreme Being. This will lead to nisala, remembering the Supreme
Lord, and will enable one, upon leaving the body, to attain a spiritual
body which is just fit for association with the Supreme Lord.

The Lord further says:

abhyasa-yoga-yuktena
cetasa nanya-gamina

paramam purusam divyam
yati parthanucintayan

"By practicing this remembering, without being deviated, thinking ever
of the Supreme Godhead, one is sure to achieve the planet of the
Divine, the Supreme Personality, O son of Kunti." (Bg. 8.8)

This is not a very difficult process. However, one must learn it from
an experienced person, from one who is already in the practice. The
mind is always flying to this and that, but one must always practice
concentrating the mind on the form of the Supreme Lord, Sri Krsna, or
on the sound of His name. The mind is naturally restless, going hither
and thither, but it can rest in the sound vibration of Krsna. One must
thus meditate on paramam purusam, the Supreme Person, and thus attain
Him. The ways and the means for ultimate realization, ultimate
attainment, are stated in the Bhagavad-gita, and the doors of this
knowledge are open for everyone. No one is barred out. All classes of
men can approach the Lord by thinking of Him, for hearing and thinking
of Him is possible for everyone.

The Lord further says (Bg. 9.32-33):

mam hi partha vyapasritya
ye 'pi syuh papa-yonayah

striyo vaisyas tatha sudras
te 'pi yanti param gatim

kim punar brahmanah punya
bhakta rajarsayas tatha
anityam asukham lokam

imam prapya bhajasva mam



"O son of Prtha, anyone who will take shelter in Me, whether a woman,
or a merchant, or one born in a low family, can yet approach the
supreme destination. How much greater then are the brahmanas, the
righteous, the devotees, and saintly Kings! In this miserable world,
these are fixed in devotional service to the Lord."

Human beings even in the lower statuses of life (a merchant, a woman or
a laborer) can attain the Supreme. One does not need highly developed
intelligence. The point is that anyone who accepts the principle of
bhakti-yoga and accepts the Supreme Lord as the summum bonum of life,
as the highest target, the ultimate goal, can approach the Lord in the
spiritual sky. If one adopts the principles enunciated in Bhagavad-
gita, he can make his life perfect and make a perfect solution to all
the problems of life which arise out of the transient nature of
material existence. This is the sum and substance of the entire
Bhagavad-gita.

In conclusion, Bhagavad-gita is a transcendental literature which one
should read very carefully. It is capable of saving one from all fear.

nehabhikrama-naso 'sti pratyavayo na vidyate
svalpam apy asya dharmasya trayate mahato bhayat

"In this endeavor there is no loss or diminution, and a little
advancement on this path can protect one from the most dangerous type
of fear." (Bg. 2.40) If one reads Bhagavad-gita sincerely and
seriously, then all of the reactions of his past misdeeds will not
react upon him. In the last portion of Bhagavad-gita (18.66), Lord Sri
Krsna proclaims:

sarva-dharman parityajya
mam ekam saranam vraja
aham tvam sarva-papebhyo
moksayisyami ma sucah

"Give up all varieties of religiousness, and just surrender unto Me;
and in return I shall protect you from all sinful reactions. Therefore,
you have nothing to fear." Thus the Lord takes all responsibility for
one who surrenders unto Him, and He indemnifies all the reactions of
sin.

One cleanses himself daily by taking a bath in water, but one who takes
his bath only once in the sacred Ganges water of the Bhagavad-gita
cleanses away all the dirt of material life. Because Bhagavad-gita is
spoken by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one need not read any
other Vedic literature. One need only attentively and regularly hear
and read Bhagavad-gita. In the present age, mankind is so absorbed with
mundane activities that it is not possible to read all of the Vedic
literatures. But this is not necessary. This one book, Bhagavad-gita,
will suffice because it is the essence of all Vedic literatures and
because it is spoken by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is said
that one who drinks the water of the Ganges certainly gets salvation,
but what to speak of one who drinks the waters of Bhagavad-gita? Gita
is the very nectar of the Mahabharata spoken by Visnu Himself, for Lord
Krsna is the original Visnu.  It is nectar emanating from the mouth of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and the Ganges is said to be
emanating from the lotus feet of the Lord. Of course there is no



difference between the mouth and the feet of the Supreme Lord, but in
our position we can appreciate that the Bhagavad-gita is even more
important than the Ganges.

The Bhagavad-gita is just like a cow, and Lord Krsna, who is a cowherd
boy, is milking this cow. The milk is the essence of the Vedas, and
Arjuna is just like a calf. The wise men, the great sages and pure
devotees, are to drink the nectarean milk of Bhagavad-gita.

In this present day, man is very eager to have one scripture, one God,
one religion, and one occupation. So let there be one common scripture
for the whole world--Bhagavad-gita. And let there be one God only for
the whole world--Sri Krsna. And one mantra only--Hare Krsna, Hare
Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare
Hare. And let there be one work only--the service of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.

THE DISCIPLIC SUCCESSION

Evam parampara-praptam imam rajarsayo viduh (Bhagavad-gita 4.2). This
Bhagavad-gita As It Is is received through this disciplic succession:

1. Krsna 17. Brahmanya Tirtha
2. Brahma 18. Vyasa Tirtha
3. Narada 19. Laksmipati
4. Vyasa 20. Madhavendra Puri
5. Madhva 21. Isvara Puri, (Nityananda,

Advaita)
6. Padmanabha 22. Lord Caitanya
7. Nrhari 23. Rupa, (Svarupa, Sanatana)
8. Madhava 24. Raghunatha, Jiva
9. Aksobhya 25. Krsnadasa
10. Jaya Tirtha 26. Narottama
11. Jnanasindhu 27. Visvanatha
12. Dayanidhi 28. (Baladeva) Jagannatha
13. Vidyanidhi 29. Bhaktivinoda
14. Rajendra 30. Gaurakisora
15. Jayadharma 31. Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati
16. Purusottama 32. His Divine Grace A. C.

      Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada



Chapter 1
Observing the Armies on the Battlefield of Kuruksetra

TEXT 1

dhrtarastra uvaca
dharma-ksetre kuru-ksetre
samaveta yuyutsavah
mamakah pandavas caiva
kim akurvata sanjaya

SYNONYMS

dhrtarastrah--King Dhrtarastra; uvaca--said; dharma-ksetre--in the
place of pilgrimage; kuru-ksetre--in the place named Kuruksetra;
samavetah--assembled; yuyutsavah--desiring to fight; mamakah--my party
(sons); pandavah--the sons of Pandu; ca--and; eva--certainly; kim--
what; akurvata--did they do; sanjaya--O Sanjaya.

TRANSLATION

Dhrtarastra said: O Sanjaya, after assembling in the place of
pilgrimage at Kuruksetra, what did my sons and the sons of Pandu do,
being desirous to fight?

PURPORT

Bhagavad-gita is the widely read theistic science summarized in the
Gita-mahatmya (Glorification of the Gita). There it says that one
should read Bhagavad-gita very scrutinizingly with the help of a person
who is a devotee of Sri Krsna and try to understand it without
personally motivated interpretations. The example of clear
understanding is there in the Bhagavad-gita itself, in the way the
teaching is understood by Arjuna, who heard the Gita directly from the
Lord. If someone is fortunate enough to understand Bhagavad-gita in
that line of disciplic succession, without motivated interpretation,
then he surpasses all studies of Vedic wisdom, and all scriptures of
the world. One will find in the Bhagavad-gita all that is contained in
other scriptures, but the reader will also find things which are not to
be found elsewhere. That is the specific standard of the Gita. It is
the perfect theistic science because it is directly spoken by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Sri Krsna.
The topics discussed by Dhrtarastra and Sanjaya, as described in the
Mahabharata, form the basic principle for this great philosophy. It is
understood that this philosophy evolved on the Battlefield of
Kuruksetra, which is a sacred place of pilgrimage from the immemorial
time of the Vedic age. It was spoken by the Lord when He was present
personally on this planet for the guidance of mankind.
The word dharma-ksetra (a place where religious rituals are performed)
is significant because, on the Battlefield of Kuruksetra, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead was present on the side of Arjuna. Dhrtarastra,
the father of the Kurus, was highly doubtful about the possibility of
his sons' ultimate victory. In his doubt, he inquired from his
secretary Sanjaya, "What did my sons and the sons of Pandu do?" He was
confident that both his sons and the sons of his younger brother Pandu
were assembled in that Field of Kuruksetra for a determined engagement
of war. Still, his inquiry is significant. He did not want a compromise
between the cousins and brothers, and he wanted to be sure of the fate



of his sons on the battlefield. Because the battle was arranged to be
fought at Kuruksetra, which is mentioned elsewhere in the Vedas as a
place of worship--even for the denizens of heaven--Dhrtarastra became
very fearful about the influence of the holy place on the outcome of
the battle. He knew very well that this would influence Arjuna and the
sons of Pandu favorably, because by nature they were all virtuous.
Sanjaya was a student of Vyasa, and therefore, by the mercy of Vyasa,
Sanjaya was able to envision the Battlefield of Kuruksetra even while
he was in the room of Dhrtarastra. And so, Dhrtarastra asked him about
the situation on the battlefield.
Both the Pandavas and the sons of Dhrtarastra belong to the same
family, but Dhrtarastra's mind is disclosed herein. He deliberately
claimed only his sons as Kurus, and he separated the sons of Pandu from
the family heritage. One can thus understand the specific position of
Dhrtarastra in his relationship with his nephews, the sons of Pandu. As
in the paddy field the unnecessary plants are taken out, so it is
expected from the very beginning of these topics that in the religious
field of Kuruksetra where the father of religion, Sri Krsna, was
present, the unwanted plants like Dhrtarastra's son Duryodhana and
others would be wiped out and the thoroughly religious persons, headed
by Yudhisthira, would be established by the Lord. This is the
significance of the words dharma-ksetre and kuru-ksetre, apart from
their historical and Vedic importance.

TEXT 2

sanjaya uvaca
drstva tu pandavanikam
vyudham duryodhanas tada
acaryam upasangamya
raja vacanam abravit

SYNONYMS

sanjayah--Sanjaya; uvaca--said; drstva--after seeing; tu--but; pandava-
anikam--the soldiers of the Pandavas; vyudham--arranged in military
phalanx; duryodhanah--King Duryodhana; tada--at that time; acaryam--the
teacher; upasangamya--approaching nearby; raja--the king; vacanam--
words; abravit--spoke.

TRANSLATION

Sanjaya said: O King, after looking over the army gathered by the sons
of Pandu, King Duryodhana went to his teacher and began to speak the
following words:

PURPORT

Dhrtarastra was blind from birth. Unfortunately, he was also bereft of
spiritual vision. He knew very well that his sons were equally blind in
the matter of religion, and he was sure that they could never reach an
understanding with the Pandavas, who were all pious since birth. Still
he was doubtful about the influence of the place of pilgrimage, and
Sanjaya could understand his motive in asking about the situation on
the battlefield. He wanted, therefore, to encourage the despondent
king, and thus he warned him that his sons were not going to make any
sort of compromise under the influence of the holy place. Sanjaya
therefore informed the king that his son, Duryodhana, after seeing the



military force of the Pandavas, at once went to the commander in chief,
Dronacarya, to inform him of the real position. Although Duryodhana is
mentioned as the king, he still had to go to the commander on account
of the seriousness of the situation. He was therefore quite fit to be a
politician. But Duryodhana's diplomatic veneer could not disguise the
fear he felt when he saw the military arrangement of the Pandavas.

TEXT 3

pasyaitam pandu-putranam
acarya mahatim camum
vyudham drupada-putrena
tava sisyena dhimata

SYNONYMS

pasya--behold; etam--this; pandu-putranam--of the sons of Pandu;
acarya--O teacher; mahatim--great; camum--military force; vyudham--
arranged; drupada-putrena--by the son of Drupada; tava--your; sisyena--
disciple; dhi-mata--very intelligent.

TRANSLATION

O my teacher, behold the great army of the sons of Pandu, so expertly
arranged by your intelligent disciple, the son of Drupada.

PURPORT

Duryodhana, a great diplomat, wanted to point out the defects of
Dronacarya, the great brahmana commander in chief. Dronacarya had some
political quarrel with King Drupada, the father of Draupadi, who was
Arjuna's wife. As a result of this quarrel, Drupada performed a great
sacrifice, by which he received the benediction of having a son who
would be able to kill Dronacarya. Dronacarya knew this perfectly well,
and yet, as a liberal brahmana, he did not hesitate to impart all his
military secrets when the son of Drupada, Dhrstadyumna, was entrusted
to him for military education. Now, on the Battlefield of Kuruksetra,
Dhrstadyumna took the side of the Pandavas, and it was he who arranged
for their military phalanx, after having learned the art from
Dronacarya. Duryodhana pointed out this mistake of Dronacarya's so that
he might be alert and uncompromising in the fighting. By this he wanted
to point out also that he should not be similarly lenient in battle
against the Pandavas, who were also Dronacarya's affectionate students.
Arjuna, especially, was his most affectionate and brilliant student.
Duryodhana also warned that such leniency in the fight would lead to
defeat.

TEXT 4

atra sura mahesvasa
bhimarjuna-sama yudhi
yuyudhano viratas ca
drupadas ca maha-rathah

SYNONYMS

atra--here; surah--heroes; maha-isu-asah--mighty bowmen; bhima-arjuna--
Bhima and Arjuna; samah--equal; yudhi--in the fight; yuyudhanah--



Yuyudhana; viratah--Virata; ca--also; drupadah--Drupada; ca--also;
maha-rathah--great fighter.

TRANSLATION

Here in this army there are many heroic bowmen equal in fighting to
Bhima and Arjuna; there are also great fighters like Yuyudhana, Virata
and Drupada.

PURPORT

Even though Dhrstadyumna was not a very important obstacle in the face
of Dronacarya's very great power in the military art, there were many
others who were the cause of fear. They are mentioned by Duryodhana as
great stumbling blocks on the path of victory because each and every
one of them was as formidable as Bhima and Arjuna. He knew the strength
of Bhima and Arjuna, and thus he compared the others with them.

TEXT 5

dhrstaketus cekitanah
kasirajas ca viryavan
purujit kuntibhojas ca
saibyas ca nara-pungavah

SYNONYMS

dhrstaketuh--Dhrstaketu; cekitanah--Cekitana; kasirajah--Kasiraja; ca--
also; virya-van--very powerful; purujit--Purujit; kuntibhojah--
Kuntibhoja; ca--and; saibyah--Saibya; ca--and; nara-pungavah--heroes in
human society.

TRANSLATION

There are also great, heroic, powerful fighters like Dhrstaketu,
Cekitana, Kasiraja, Purujit, Kuntibhoja and Saibya.

TEXT 6

yudhamanyus ca vikranta
uttamaujas ca viryavan
saubhadro draupadeyas ca
sarva eva maha-rathah

SYNONYMS

yudhamanyuh--Yudhamanyu; ca--and; vikrantah--mighty; uttamaujah--
Uttamauja; ca--and; virya-van--very powerful; saubhadrah--the son of
Subhadra; draupadeyah--the sons of Draupadi; ca--and; sarve--all; eva--
certainly; maha-rathah--great chariot fighters.

TRANSLATION

There are the mighty Yudhamanyu, the very powerful Uttamauja, the son
of Subhadra and the sons of Draupadi. All these warriors are great
chariot fighters.



TEXT 7

asmakam tu visista ye
tan nibodha dvijottama
nayaka mama sainyasya
samjnartham tan bravimi te

SYNONYMS

asmakam--our; tu--but; visistah--especially powerful; ye--those; tan--
them; nibodha--just take note, be informed; dvija-uttama--the best of
the brahmanas; nayakah--captains; mama--my; sainyasya--of the soldiers;
samjna-artham--for information; tan--them; bravimi--I am speaking; te--
your.

TRANSLATION

O best of the brahmanas, for your information, let me tell you about
the captains who are especially qualified to lead my military force.

TEXT 8

bhavan bhismas ca karnas ca
krpas ca samitim-jayah
asvatthama vikarnas ca
saumadattis tathaiva ca

SYNONYMS

bhavan--your self; bhismah--Grandfather Bhisma; ca--also; karnah--
Karna; ca--and; krpah--Krpa; ca--and; samitim-jayah--always victorious
in battle; asvatthama--Asvatthama; vikarnah--Vikarna; ca--as well as;
saumadattih--the son of Somadatta; tatha--and as; eva--certainly; ca--
and.

TRANSLATION

There are personalities like yourself, Bhisma, Karna, Krpa, Asvatthama,
Vikarna and the son of Somadatta called Bhurisrava, who are always
victorious in battle.

PURPORT

Duryodhana mentions the exceptional heroes in the battle, all of whom
are ever victorious. Vikarna is the brother of Duryodhana, Asvatthama
is the son of Dronacarya, and Saumadatti, or Bhurisrava, is the son of
the King of the Bahlikas. Karna is the half brother of Arjuna, as he
was born of Kunti before her marriage with King Pandu. Krpacarya's twin
sister married Dronacarya.

TEXT 9

anye ca bahavah sura
mad-arthe tyakta-jivitah
nana-sastra-praharanah
sarve yuddha-visaradah

SYNONYMS



anye--many others; ca--also; bahavah--in great numbers; surah--heroes;
mat-arthe--for my sake; tyakta-jivitah--prepared to risk life; nana--
many; sastra--weapons; praharanah--equipped with; sarve--all of them;
yuddha--battle; visaradah--experienced in military science.

TRANSLATION

There are many other heroes who are prepared to lay down their lives
for my sake. All of them are well equipped with different kinds of
weapons, and all are experienced in military science.

PURPORT

As far as the others are concerned--like Jayadratha, Krtavarma, Salya,
etc.--all are determined to lay down their lives for Duryodhana's sake.
In other words, it is already concluded that all of them would die in
the Battle of Kuruksetra for joining the party of the sinful
Duryodhana. Duryodhana was, of course, confident of his victory on
account of the above-mentioned combined strength of his friends.

TEXT 10

aparyaptam tad asmakam
balam bhismabhiraksitam
paryaptam tv idam etesam
balam bhimabhiraksitam

SYNONYMS

aparyaptam--immeasurable; tat--that; asmakam--of ours; balam--strength;
bhisma--by Grandfather Bhisma; abhiraksitam--perfectly protected;
paryaptam--limited; tu--but; idam--all this; etesam--of the Pandavas;
balam--strength; bhima--by Bhima; abhiraksitam--carefully protected.

TRANSLATION

Our strength is immeasurable, and we are perfectly protected by
Grandfather Bhisma, whereas the strength of the Pandavas, carefully
protected by Bhima, is limited.

PURPORT

Herein an estimation of comparative strength is made by Duryodhana. He
thinks that the strength of his armed forces is immeasurable, being
specifically protected by the most experienced general, Grandfather
Bhisma. On the other hand, the forces of the Pandavas are limited,
being protected by a less experienced general, Bhima, who is like a fig
in the presence of Bhisma. Duryodhana was always envious of Bhima
because he knew perfectly well that if he should die at all, he would
only be killed by Bhima. But at the same time, he was confident of his
victory on account of the presence of Bhisma, who was a far superior
general. His conclusion that he would come out of the battle victorious
was well ascertained.

TEXT 11

ayanesu ca sarvesu



yatha-bhagam avasthitah
bhismam evabhiraksantu
bhavantah sarva eva hi

SYNONYMS

ayanesu--in the strategic points; ca--also; sarvesu--everywhere; yatha-
bhagam--as they are differently arranged; avasthitah--situated;
bhismam--unto Grandfather Bhisma; eva--certainly; abhiraksantu--support
may be given; bhavantah--all of you; sarve--respectively; eva--
certainly; hi--and exactly.

TRANSLATION

Now all of you must give full support to Grandfather Bhisma, standing
at your respective strategic points in the phalanx of the army.

PURPORT

Duryodhana, after praising the prowess of Bhisma, further considered
that others might think that they had been considered less important,
so in his usual diplomatic way, he tried to adjust the situation in the
above words. He emphasized that Bhismadeva was undoubtedly the greatest
hero, but he was an old man, so everyone must especially think of his
protection from all sides. He might become engaged in the fight, and
the enemy might take advantage of his full engagement on one side.
Therefore, it was important that other heroes would not leave their
strategic positions and allow the enemy to break the phalanx.
Duryodhana clearly felt that the victory of the Kurus depended on the
presence of Bhismadeva. He was confident of the full support of
Bhismadeva and Dronacarya in the battle because he well knew that they
did not even speak a word when Arjuna's wife Draupadi, in her helpless
condition, had appealed to them for justice while she was being forced
to appear naked in the presence of all the great generals in the
assembly. Although he knew that the two generals had some sort of
affection for the Pandavas, he hoped that all such affection would now
be completely given up by them, as was customary during the gambling
performances.

TEXT 12

tasya sanjanayan harsam
kuru-vrddhah pitamahah
simha-nadam vinadyoccaih
sankham dadhmau pratapavan

SYNONYMS

tasya--his; sanjanayan--increasing; harsam--cheerfulness; kuru-vrddhah-
-the grandsire of the Kuru dynasty (Bhisma); pitamahah--the
grandfather; simha-nadam--roaring sound, like a lion; vinadya--
vibrating; uccaih--very loudly; sankham--conchshell; dadhmau--blew;
pratapa-van--the valiant.

TRANSLATION



Then Bhisma, the great valiant grandsire of the Kuru dynasty, the
grandfather of the fighters, blew his conchshell very loudly, like the
sound of a lion, giving Duryodhana joy.

PURPORT

The grandsire of the Kuru dynasty could understand the inner meaning of
the heart of his grandson Duryodhana, and out of his natural compassion
for him he tried to cheer him by blowing his conchshell very loudly,
befitting his position as a lion. Indirectly, by the symbolism of the
conchshell, he informed his depressed grandson Duryodhana that he had
no chance of victory in the battle, because the Supreme Lord Krsna was
on the other side. But still, it was his duty to conduct the fight, and
no pains would be spared in that connection.

TEXT 13

tatah sankhas ca bheryas ca
panavanaka-gomukhah
sahasaivabhyahanyanta
sa sabdas tumulo 'bhavat

SYNONYMS

tatah--thereafter; sankhah--conchshells; ca--also; bheryah--bugles; ca-
-and; panava-anaka--trumpets and drums; go-mukhah--horns; sahasa--all
of a sudden; eva--certainly; abhyahanyanta--being simultaneously
sounded; sah--that; sabdah--combined sound; tumulah--tumultuous;
abhavat--became.

TRANSLATION

After that, the conchshells, bugles, trumpets, drums and horns were all
suddenly sounded, and the combined sound was tumultuous.

TEXT 14

tatah svetair hayair yukte
mahati syandane sthitau
madhavah pandavas caiva
divyau sankhau pradadhmatuh

SYNONYMS

tatah--thereafter; svetaih--by white; hayaih--horses; yukte--being
yoked; mahati--in a great; syandane--chariot; sthitau--so situated;
madhavah--Krsna (the husband of the goddess of fortune); pandavah--
Arjuna (the son of Pandu); ca--also; eva--certainly; divyau--
transcendental; sankhau--conchshells; pradadhmatuh--sounded.

TRANSLATION

On the other side, both Lord Krsna and Arjuna, stationed on a great
chariot drawn by white horses, sounded their transcendental
conchshells.

PURPORT



In contrast with the conchshell blown by Bhismadeva, the conchshells in
the hands of Krsna and Arjuna are described as transcendental. The
sounding of the transcendental conchshells indicated that there was no
hope of victory for the other side because Krsna was on the side of the
Pandavas. Jayas tu pandu-putranam yesam pakse janardanah. Victory is
always with persons like the sons of Pandu because Lord Krsna is
associated with them. And whenever and wherever the Lord is present,
the goddess of fortune is also there because the goddess of fortune
never lives alone without her husband. Therefore, victory and fortune
were awaiting Arjuna, as indicated by the transcendental sound produced
by the conchshell of Visnu, or Lord Krsna. Besides that, the chariot on
which both the friends were seated was donated by Agni (the fire-god)
to Arjuna, and this indicated that this chariot was capable of
conquering all sides, wherever it was drawn over the three worlds.

TEXT 15

pancajanyam hrsikeso
devadattam dhananjayah
paundram dadhmau maha-sankham
bhima-karma vrkodarah

SYNONYMS

pancajanyam--the conchshell named Pancajanya; hrsika-isah--Hrsikesa
(Krsna, the Lord who directs the senses of the devotees); devadattam--
the conchshell named Devadatta; dhanam-jayah--Dhananjaya (Arjuna, the
winner of wealth); paundram--the conch named Paundra; dadhmau--blew;
maha-sankham--the terrific conchshell; bhima-karma--one who performs
herculean tasks; vrka-udarah--the voracious eater (Bhima).

TRANSLATION

Then, Lord Krsna blew His conchshell, called Pancajanya; Arjuna blew
his, the Devadatta; and Bhima, the voracious eater and performer of
herculean tasks, blew his terrific conchshell called Paundra.

PURPORT

Lord Krsna is referred to as Hrsikesa in this verse because He is the
owner of all senses. The living entities are part and parcel of Him,
and, therefore the senses of the living entities are also part and
parcel of His senses. The impersonalists cannot account for the senses
of the living entities, and therefore they are always anxious to
describe all living entities as sense-less, or impersonal. The Lord,
situated in the hearts of all living entities, directs their senses.
But, He directs in terms of the surrender of the living entity, and in
the case of a pure devotee He directly controls the senses. Here on the
Battlefield of Kuruksetra the Lord directly controls the transcendental
senses of Arjuna, and thus His particular name of Hrsikesa. The Lord
has different names according to His different activities. For example,
His name is Madhusudana because He killed the demon of the name Madhu;
His name is Govinda because He gives pleasure to the cows and to the
senses; His name is Vasudeva because He appeared as the son of
Vasudeva; His name is Devaki-nandana because He accepted Devaki as His
mother; His name is Yasoda-nandana because He awarded His childhood
pastimes to Yasoda at Vrndavana; His name is Partha-sarathi because He
worked as charioteer of His friend Arjuna. Similarly, His name is



Hrsikesa because He gave direction to Arjuna on the Battlefield of
Kuruksetra.
Arjuna is referred to as Dhananjaya in this verse because he helped his
elder brother in fetching wealth when it was required by the king to
make expenditures for different sacrifices. Similarly, Bhima is known
as Vrkodara because he could eat as voraciously as he could perform
herculean tasks, such as killing the demon Hidimba. So, the particular
types of conchshell blown by the different personalities on the side of
the Pandavas, beginning with the Lord's, were all very encouraging to
the fighting soldiers. On the other side there were no such credits,
nor the presence of Lord Krsna, the supreme director, nor that of the
goddess of fortune. So, they were predestined to lose the battle--and
that was the message announced by the sounds of the conchshells.

TEXTS 16-18

anantavijayam raja
kunti-putro yudhisthirah
nakulah sahadevas ca
sughosa-manipuspakau

kasyas ca paramesv-asah
sikhandi ca maha-rathah
dhrstadyumno viratas ca
satyakis caparajitah

drupado draupadeyas ca
sarvasah prthivi-pate
saubhadras ca maha-bahuh
sankhan dadhmuh prthak prthak

SYNONYMS

ananta-vijayam--the conch named Ananta-vijaya; raja--the king; kunti-
putrah--the son of Kunti; yudhisthirah--Yudhisthira; nakulah--Nakula;
sahadevah--Sahadeva; ca--and; sughosa-manipuspakau--the conches named
Sughosa and Manipuspaka; kasyah--the King of Kasi (Varanasi); ca--and;
parama-isu-asah--the great archer; sikhandi--Sikhandi; ca--also; maha-
rathah--one who can fight alone against thousands; dhrstadyumnah--
Dhrstadyumna (the son of King Drupada); viratah--Virata (the prince who
gave shelter to the Pandavas while they were in disguise); ca--also;
satyakih--Satyaki (the same as Yuyudhana, the charioteer of Lord
Krsna); ca--and; aparajitah--who were never vanquished before;
drupadah--Drupada, the King of Pancala; draupadeyah--the sons of
Draupadi; ca--also; sarvasah--all; prthivi-pate--O King; saubhadrah--
the son of Subhadra (Abhimanyu); ca--also; maha-bahuh--mighty-armed;
sankhan--conchshells; dadhmuh--blew; prthak prthak--each separately.

TRANSLATION

King Yudhisthira, the son of Kunti, blew his conchshell, the Ananta-
vijaya, and Nakula and Sahadeva blew the Sughosa and Manipuspaka. That
great archer the King of Kasi, the great fighter Sikhandi,
Dhrstadyumna, Virata and the unconquerable Satyaki, Drupada, the sons
of Draupadi, and the others, O King, such as the mighty-armed son of
Subhadra, all blew their respective conchshells.

PURPORT



Sanjaya informed King Dhrtarastra very tactfully that his unwise policy
of deceiving the sons of Pandu and endeavoring to enthrone his own sons
on the seat of the kingdom was not very laudable. The signs already
clearly indicated that the whole Kuru dynasty would be killed in that
great battle. Beginning with the grandsire, Bhisma, down to the
grandsons like Abhimanyu and others--including kings from many states
of the world--all were present there, and all were doomed. The whole
catastrophe was due to King Dhrtarastra, because he encouraged the
policy followed by his sons.

TEXT 19

sa ghoso dhartarastranam
hrdayani vyadarayat
nabhas ca prthivim caiva
tumulo 'bhyanunadayan

SYNONYMS

sah--that; ghosah--vibration; dhartarastranam--of the sons of
Dhrtarastra; hrdayani--hearts; vyadarayat--shattered; nabhah--the sky;
ca--also; prthivim--the surface of the earth; ca--also; eva--certainly;
tumulah--uproarious; abhyanunadayan--by resounding.

TRANSLATION

The blowing of these different conchshells became uproarious, and thus,
vibrating both in the sky and on the earth, it shattered the hearts of
the sons of Dhrtarastra.

PURPORT

When Bhisma and the others on the side of Duryodhana blew their
respective conchshells, there was no heart-breaking on the part of the
Pandavas. Such occurrences are not mentioned, but in this particular
verse it is mentioned that the hearts of the sons of Dhrtarastra were
shattered by the sounds vibrated by the Pandavas' party. This is due to
the Pandavas and their confidence in Lord Krsna. One who takes shelter
of the Supreme Lord has nothing to fear, even in the midst of the
greatest calamity.

TEXT 20

atha vyavasthitan drstva
dhartarastran kapi-dhvajah
pravrtte sastra-sampate
dhanur udyamya pandavah
hrsikesam tada vakyam
idam aha mahi-pate

SYNONYMS

atha--thereupon; vyavasthitan--situated; drstva--looking upon;
dhartarastran--the sons of Dhrtarastra; kapi-dhvajah--one whose flag is
marked with Hanuman; pravrtte--while about to engage; sastra-sampate--
the arrows released; dhanuh--bow; udyamya--after taking up; pandavah--



the son of Pandu (Arjuna); hrsikesam--unto Lord Krsna; tada--at that
time; vakyam--words; idam--these; aha--said; mahi-pate--O King.

TRANSLATION

O King, at that time Arjuna, the son of Pandu, who was seated in his
chariot, bearing the flag marked with Hanuman, took up his bow and
prepared to shoot his arrows, looking at the sons of Dhrtarastra. O
King, Arjuna then spoke to Hrsikesa [Krsna] these words:

PURPORT

The battle was just about to begin. It is understood from the above
statement that the sons of Dhrtarastra were more or less disheartened
by the unexpected arrangement of military force by the Pandavas, who
were guided by the direct instructions of Lord Krsna on the
battlefield. The emblem of Hanuman on the flag of Arjuna is another
sign of victory because Hanuman cooperated with Lord Rama in the battle
between Rama and Ravana, and Lord Rama emerged victorious. Now both
Rama and Hanuman were present on the chariot of Arjuna to help him.
Lord Krsna is Rama Himself, and wherever Lord Rama is, His eternal
servitor Hanuman and His eternal consort Sita, the goddess of fortune,
are present. Therefore, Arjuna had no cause to fear any enemies
whatsoever. And above all, the Lord of the senses, Lord Krsna, was
personally present to give him direction. Thus, all good counsel was
available to Arjuna in the matter of executing the battle. In such
auspicious conditions, arranged by the Lord for His eternal devotee,
lay the signs of assured victory.

TEXTS 21-22

arjuna uvaca
senayor ubhayor madhye
ratham sthapaya me 'cyuta
yavad etan nirikse 'ham
yoddhu-kaman avasthitan

kair maya saha yoddhavyam
asmin rana-samudyame

SYNONYMS

arjunah--Arjuna; uvaca--said; senayoh--of the armies; ubhayoh--of both
the parties; madhye--in between them; ratham--the chariot; sthapaya--
please keep; me--my; acyuta--O infallible one; yavat--as long as; etan-
-all these; nirikse--may look; aham--I; yoddhu-kaman--desiring to
fight; avasthitan--arrayed on the battlefield; kaih--with whom; maya--
by me; saha--with; yoddhavyam--to fight with; asmin--in this; rana--
strife; samudyame--in the attempt.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: O infallible one, please draw my chariot between the two
armies so that I may see who is present here, who is desirous of
fighting, and with whom I must contend in this great battle attempt.

PURPORT



Although Lord Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, out of His
causeless mercy He was engaged in the service of His friend. He never
fails in His affection for His devotees, and thus He is addressed
herein as infallible. As charioteer, He had to carry out the orders of
Arjuna, and since He did not hesitate to do so, He is addressed as
infallible. Although He had accepted the position of a charioteer for
His devotee, His supreme position was not challenged. In all
circumstances, He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hrsikesa, the
Lord of the total senses. The relationship between the Lord and His
servitor is very sweet and transcendental. The servitor is always ready
to render service to the Lord, and, similarly, the Lord is always
seeking an opportunity to render some service to the devotee. He takes
greater pleasure in His pure devotee's assuming the advantageous
position of ordering Him than He does in being the giver of orders. As
master, everyone is under His orders, and no one is above Him to order
Him. But when He finds that a pure devotee is ordering Him, He obtains
transcendental pleasure, although He is the infallible master of all
circumstances.
As a pure devotee of the Lord, Arjuna had no desire to fight with his
cousins and brothers, but he was forced to come onto the battlefield by
the obstinacy of Duryodhana, who was never agreeable to any peaceful
negotiation. Therefore, he was very anxious to see who the leading
persons present on the battlefield were. Although there was no question
of a peacemaking endeavor on the battlefield, he wanted to see them
again and to see how much they were bent upon demanding an unwanted
war.

TEXT 23

yotsyamanan avekse 'ham
ya ete 'tra samagatah
dhartarastrasya durbuddher
yuddhe priya-cikirsavah

SYNONYMS

yotsyamanan--those who will be fighting; avekse--let me see; aham--I;
ye--who; ete--those; atra--here; samagatah--assembled; dhartarastrasya-
-the son of Dhrtarastra; durbuddheh--evil-minded; yuddhe--in the fight;
priya--well; cikirsavah--wishing.

TRANSLATION

Let me see those who have come here to fight, wishing to please the
evil-minded son of Dhrtarastra.

PURPORT

It was an open secret that Duryodhana wanted to usurp the kingdom of
the Pandavas by evil plans, in collaboration with his father,
Dhrtarastra. Therefore, all persons who had joined the side of
Duryodhana must have been birds of the same feather. Arjuna wanted to
see them in the battlefield before the fight was begun, just to learn
who they were, but he had no intention of proposing peace negotiations
with them. It was also a fact that he wanted to see them to make an
estimate of the strength which he had to face, although he was quite
confident of victory because Krsna was sitting by his side.



TEXT 24

sanjaya uvaca
evam ukto hrsikeso
gudakesena bharata
senayor ubhayor madhye
sthapayitva rathottamam

SYNONYMS

sanjayah--Sanjaya; uvaca--said; evam--thus; uktah--addressed;
hrsikesah--Lord Krsna; gudakesena--by Arjuna; bharata--O descendant of
Bharata; senayoh--of armies; ubhayoh--of both; madhye--in the midst of;
sthapayitva--by placing; ratha-uttamam--the finest chariot.

TRANSLATION

Sanjaya said: O descendant of Bharata, being thus addressed by Arjuna,
Lord Krsna drew up the fine chariot in the midst of the armies of both
parties.

PURPORT

In this verse Arjuna is referred to as Gudakesa. Gudaka means sleep,
and one who conquers sleep is called gudakesa. Sleep also means
ignorance. So Arjuna conquered both sleep and ignorance because of his
friendship with Krsna. As a great devotee of Krsna, he could not forget
Krsna even for a moment, because that is the nature of a devotee.
Either in waking or in sleep, a devotee of the Lord can never be free
from thinking of Krsna's name, form, qualities and pastimes. Thus a
devotee of Krsna can conquer both sleep and ignorance simply by
thinking of Krsna constantly. This is called Krsna consciousness, or
samadhi. As Hrsikesa, or the director of the senses and mind of every
living entity, Krsna could understand Arjuna's purpose in placing the
chariot in the midst of the armies. Thus He did so, and spoke as
follows.

TEXT 25

bhisma-drona-pramukhatah
sarvesam ca mahi-ksitam
uvaca partha pasyaitan
samavetan kurun iti

SYNONYMS

bhisma--Grandfather Bhisma; drona--the teacher Drona; pramukhatah--in
front of; sarvesam--all; ca--also; mahi-ksitam--chiefs of the world;
uvaca--said; partha--O Partha (son of Prtha); pasya--just behold; etan-
-all of them; samavetan--assembled; kurun--all the members of the Kuru
dynasty; iti--thus.

TRANSLATION

In the presence of Bhisma, Drona and all other chieftains of the world,
Hrsikesa, the Lord, said, Just behold, Partha, all the Kurus who are
assembled here.



PURPORT

As the Supersoul of all living entities, Lord Krsna could understand
what was going on in the mind of Arjuna. The use of the word Hrsikesa
in this connection indicates that He knew everything. And the word
Partha, or the son of Kunti or Prtha, is also similarly significant in
reference to Arjuna. As a friend, He wanted to inform Arjuna that
because Arjuna was the son of Prtha, the sister of His own father
Vasudeva, He had agreed to be the charioteer of Arjuna. Now what did
Krsna mean when He told Arjuna to "behold the Kurus"? Did Arjuna want
to stop there and not fight? Krsna never expected such things from the
son of His aunt Prtha. The mind of Arjuna was thus predicted by the
Lord in friendly joking.

TEXT 26

tatrapasyat sthitan parthah
pitrn atha pitamahan
acaryan matulan bhratrn
putran pautran sakhims tatha
svasuran suhrdas caiva
senayor ubhayor api

SYNONYMS

tatra--there; apasyat--he could see; sthitan--standing; parthah--
Arjuna; pitrn--fathers; atha--also; pitamahan--grandfathers; acaryan--
teachers; matulan--maternal uncles; bhratrn--brothers; putran--sons;
pautran--grandsons; sakhin--friends; tatha--too; svasuran--fathers-in-
law; suhrdah--well-wishers; ca--also; eva--certainly; senayoh--of the
armies; ubhayoh--of both parties; api--including.

TRANSLATION

There Arjuna could see, within the midst of the armies of both parties,
his fathers, grandfathers, teachers, maternal uncles, brothers, sons,
grandsons, friends, and also his father-in-law and well-wishers--all
present there.

PURPORT

On the battlefield Arjuna could see all kinds of relatives. He could
see persons like Bhurisrava, who were his father's contemporaries,
grandfathers Bhisma and Somadatta, teachers like Dronacarya and
Krpacarya, maternal uncles like Salya and Sakuni, brothers like
Duryodhana, sons like Laksmana, friends like Asvatthama, well-wishers
like Krtavarma, etc. He could see also the armies which contained many
of his friends.

TEXT 27

tan samiksya sa kaunteyah
sarvan bandhun avasthitan
krpaya parayavisto
visidann idam abravit

SYNONYMS



tan--all of them; samiksya--after seeing; sah--he; kaunteyah--the son
of Kunti; sarvan--all kinds of; bandhun--relatives; avasthitan--
situated; krpaya--by compassion; paraya--of a high grade; avistah--
overwhelmed by; visidan--while lamenting; idam--thus; abravit--spoke.

TRANSLATION

When the son of Kunti, Arjuna, saw all these different grades of
friends and relatives, he became overwhelmed with compassion and spoke
thus:

TEXT 28

arjuna uvaca
drstvemam sva-janam krsna
yuyutsum samupasthitam
sidanti mama gatrani
mukham ca parisusyati

SYNONYMS

arjunah--Arjuna; uvaca--said; drstva--after seeing; imam--all these;
sva-janam--kinsmen; krsna--O Krsna; yuyutsum--all in fighting spirit;
samupasthitam--all present; sidanti--quivering; mama--my; gatrani--
limbs of the body; mukham--mouth; ca--also; parisusyati--drying up.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: My dear Krsna, seeing my friends and relatives present
before me in such a fighting spirit, I feel the limbs of my body
quivering and my mouth drying up.

PURPORT

Any man who has genuine devotion to the Lord has all the good qualities
which are found in godly persons or in the demigods, whereas the
nondevotee, however advanced he may be in material qualifications by
education and culture, lacks in godly qualities. As such, Arjuna, just
after seeing his kinsmen, friends and relatives on the battlefield, was
at once overwhelmed by compassion for them who had so decided to fight
amongst themselves. As far as his soldiers were concerned, he was
sympathetic from the beginning, but he felt compassion even for the
soldiers of the opposite party, foreseeing their imminent death. And so
thinking, the limbs of his body began to quiver, and his mouth became
dry. He was more or less astonished to see their fighting spirit.
Practically the whole community, all blood relatives of Arjuna, had
come to fight with him. This overwhelmed a kind devotee like Arjuna.
Although it is not mentioned here, still one can easily imagine that
not only were Arjuna's bodily limbs quivering and his mouth drying up,
but that he was also crying out of compassion. Such symptoms in Arjuna
were not due to weakness but to his softheartedness, a characteristic
of a pure devotee of the Lord. It is said therefore:

yasyasti bhaktir bhagavaty akincana
sarvair gunais tatra samasate surah
harav abhaktasya kuto mahad-guna
mano-rathenasati dhavato bahih



"One who has unflinching devotion for the Personality of Godhead has
all the good qualities of the demigods. But one who is not a devotee of
the Lord has only material qualifications that are of little value.
This is because he is hovering on the mental plane and is certain to be
attracted by the glaring material energy." (Bhag. 5.18.12)

TEXT 29

vepathus ca sarire me
roma-harsas ca jayate
gandivam sramsate hastat
tvak caiva paridahyate

SYNONYMS

vepathuh--trembling of the body; ca--also; sarire--on the body; me--my;
roma-harsah--standing of the hair on end; ca--also; jayate--is taking
place; gandivam--the bow of Arjuna; sramsate--is slipping; hastat--from
the hands; tvak--skin; ca--also; eva--certainly; paridahyate--burning.

TRANSLATION

My whole body is trembling, and my hair is standing on end. My bow
Gandiva is slipping from my hand, and my skin is burning.

PURPORT

There are two kinds of trembling of the body, and two kinds of
standings of the hair on end. Such phenomena occur either in great
spiritual ecstasy or out of great fear under material conditions. There
is no fear in transcendental realization. Arjuna's symptoms in this
situation are out of material fear--namely, loss of life. This is
evident from other symptoms also; he became so impatient that his
famous bow Gandiva was slipping from his hands, and, because his heart
was burning within him, he was feeling a burning sensation of the skin.
All these are due to a material conception of life.

TEXT 30

na ca saknomy avasthatum
bhramativa ca me manah
nimittani ca pasyami
viparitani kesava

SYNONYMS

na--nor; ca--also; saknomi--am I able; avasthatum--to stay; bhramati--
forgetting; iva--as; ca--and; me--my; manah--mind; nimittani--causes;
ca--also; pasyami--I foresee; viparitani--just the opposite; kesava--O
killer of the demon Kesi (Krsna).

TRANSLATION

I am now unable to stand here any longer. I am forgetting myself, and
my mind is reeling. I foresee only evil, O killer of the Kesi demon.

PURPORT



Due to his impatience, Arjuna was unable to stay on the battlefield,
and he was forgetting himself on account of the weakness of his mind.
Excessive attachment for material things puts a man in a bewildering
condition of existence. Bhayam dvitiyabhinivesatah syat (Bhag.
11.2.37): such fearfulness and loss of mental equilibrium take place in
persons who are too affected by material conditions. Arjuna envisioned
only unhappiness in the battlefield--he would not be happy even by
gaining victory over the foe. The word nimitta is significant. When a
man sees only frustration in his expectations, he thinks, "Why am I
here?" Everyone is interested in himself and his own welfare. No one is
interested in the Supreme Self. Arjuna is supposed to show disregard
for self-interest by submission to the will of Krsna, who is everyone's
real self-interest. The conditioned soul forgets this, and therefore
suffers material pains. Arjuna thought that his victory in the battle
would only be a cause of lamentation for him.

TEXT 31

na ca sreyo 'nupasyami
hatva sva-janam ahave
na kankse vijayam krsna
na ca rajyam sukhani ca

SYNONYMS

na--nor; ca--also; sreyah--good; anupasyami--do I foresee; hatva--by
killing; sva-janam--own kinsmen; ahave--in the fight; na--nor; kankse--
do I desire; vijayam--victory; krsna--O Krsna; na--nor; ca--also;
rajyam--kingdom; sukhani--happiness thereof; ca--also.

TRANSLATION

I do not see how any good can come from killing my own kinsmen in this
battle, nor can I, my dear Krsna, desire any subsequent victory,
kingdom, or happiness.

PURPORT

Without knowing that one's self-interest is in Visnu (or Krsna),
conditioned souls are attracted by bodily relationships, hoping to be
happy in such situations. Under delusion, they forget that Krsna is
also the cause of material happiness. Arjuna appears to have even
forgotten the moral codes for a ksatriya. It is said that two kinds of
men, namely the ksatriya who dies directly in front of the battlefield
under Krsna's personal orders and the person in the renounced order of
life who is absolutely devoted to spiritual culture, are eligible to
enter into the sun globe, which is so powerful and dazzling. Arjuna is
reluctant even to kill his enemies, let alone his relatives. He thought
that by killing his kinsmen there would be no happiness in his life,
and therefore he was not willing to fight, just as a person who does
not feel hunger is not inclined to cook. He has now decided to go into
the forest and live a secluded life in frustration. But as a ksatriya,
he requires a kingdom for his subsistence, because the ksatriyas cannot
engage themselves in any other occupation. But Arjuna has no kingdom.
Arjuna's sole opportunity for gaining a kingdom lay in fighting with
his cousins and brothers and reclaiming the kingdom inherited from his
father, which he does not like to do. Therefore he considers himself
fit to go to the forest to live a secluded life of frustration.



TEXTS 32-35

kim no rajyena govinda
kim bhogair jivitena va
yesam arthe kanksitam no
rajyam bhogah sukhani ca

ta ime 'vasthita yuddhe
pranams tyaktva dhanani ca
acaryah pitarah putras
tathaiva ca pitamahah

matulah svasurah pautrah
syalah sambandhinas tatha
etan na hantum icchami
ghnato 'pi madhusudana

api trailokya-rajyasya
hetoh kim nu mahi-krte
nihatya dhartarastran nah
ka pritih syaj janardana

SYNONYMS

kim--what use; nah--to us; rajyena--is the kingdom; govinda--O Krsna;
kim--what; bhogaih--enjoyment; jivitena--by living; va--either; yesam--
for whom; arthe--for the matter of; kanksitam--desired; nah--our;
rajyam--kingdom; bhogah--material enjoyment; sukhani--all happiness;
ca--also; te--all of them; ime--these; avasthitah--situated; yuddhe--in
this battlefield; pranan--lives; tyaktva--giving up; dhanani--riches;
ca--also; acaryah--teachers; pitarah--fathers; putrah--sons; tatha--as
well as; eva--certainly; ca--also; pitamahah--grandfathers; matulah--
maternal uncles; svasurah--fathers-in-law; pautrah--grandsons; syalah--
brothers-in-law; sambandhinah--relatives; tatha--as well as; etan--all
these; na--never; hantum--for killing; icchami--do I wish; ghnatah--
being killed; api--even; madhusudana--O killer of the demon Madhu
(Krsna); api--even if; trai-lokya--of the three worlds; rajyasya--of
the kingdoms; hetoh--in exchange; kim--what to speak of; nu--only;
mahi-krte--for the sake of the earth; nihatya--by killing;
dhartarastran--the sons of Dhrtarastra; nah--our; ka--what; pritih--
pleasure; syat--will there be; janardana--O maintainer of all living
entities.

TRANSLATION

O Govinda, of what avail to us are kingdoms, happiness or even life
itself when all those for whom we may desire them are now arrayed in
this battlefield? O Madhusudana, when teachers, fathers, sons,
grandfathers, maternal uncles, fathers-in-law, grandsons, brothers-in-
law and all relatives are ready to give up their lives and properties
and are standing before me, then why should I wish to kill them, though
I may survive? O maintainer of all creatures, I am not prepared to
fight with them even in exchange for the three worlds, let alone this
earth.

PURPORT



Arjuna has addressed Lord Krsna as Govinda because Krsna is the object
of all pleasures for cows and the senses. By using this significant
word, Arjuna indicates what will satisfy his senses. Although Govinda
is not meant for satisfying our senses, if we try to satisfy the senses
of Govinda then automatically our own senses are satisfied. Materially,
everyone wants to satisfy his senses, and he wants God to be the order
supplier for such satisfaction. The Lord will satisfy the senses of the
living entities as much as they deserve, but not to the extent that
they may covet. But when one takes the opposite way--namely, when one
tries to satisfy the senses of Govinda without desiring to satisfy
one's own senses--then by the grace of Govinda all desires of the
living entity are satisfied. Arjuna's deep affection for community and
family members is exhibited here partly due to his natural compassion
for them. He is therefore not prepared to fight. Everyone wants to show
his opulence to friends and relatives, but Arjuna fears that all his
relatives and friends will be killed in the battlefield, and he will be
unable to share his opulence after victory. This is a typical
calculation of material life. The transcendental life is, however,
different. Since a devotee wants to satisfy the desires of the Lord, he
can, Lord willing, accept all kinds of opulence for the service of the
Lord, and if the Lord is not willing, he should not accept a farthing.
Arjuna did not want to kill his relatives, and if there were any need
to kill them, he desired that Krsna kill them personally. At this point
he did not know that Krsna had already killed them before their coming
into the battlefield and that he was only to become an instrument for
Krsna. This fact is disclosed in the following chapters. As a natural
devotee of the Lord, Arjuna did not like to retaliate against his
miscreant cousins and brothers, but it was the Lord's plan that they
should all be killed. The devotee of the Lord does not retaliate
against the wrongdoer, but the Lord does not tolerate any mischief done
to the devotee by the miscreants. The Lord can excuse a person on His
own account, but He excuses no one who has done harm to His devotees.
Therefore the Lord was determined to kill the miscreants, although
Arjuna wanted to excuse them.

TEXT 36

papam evasrayed asman
hatvaitan atatayinah
tasman narha vayam hantum
dhartarastran sa-bandhavan
sva-janam hi katham hatva
sukhinah syama madhava

SYNONYMS

papam--vices; eva--certainly; asrayet--must take upon; asman--us;
hatva--by killing; etan--all these; atatayinah--aggressors; tasmat--
therefore; na--never; arhah--deserving; vayam--we; hantum--to kill;
dhartarastran--the sons of Dhrtarastra; sa-bandhavan--along with
friends; sva-janam--kinsmen; hi--certainly; katham--how; hatva--by
killing; sukhinah--happy; syama--become; madhava--O Krsna, husband of
the goddess of fortune.

TRANSLATION

Sin will overcome us if we slay such aggressors. Therefore it is not
proper for us to kill the sons of Dhrtarastra and our friends. What



should we gain, O Krsna, husband of the goddess of fortune, and how
could we be happy by killing our own kinsmen?

PURPORT

According to Vedic injunctions there are six kinds of aggressors: 1) a
poison giver, 2) one who sets fire to the house, 3) one who attacks
with deadly weapons, 4) one who plunders riches, 5) one who occupies
another's land, and 6) one who kidnaps a wife. Such aggressors are at
once to be killed, and no sin is incurred by killing such aggressors.
Such killing of aggressors is quite befitting any ordinary man, but
Arjuna was not an ordinary person. He was saintly by character, and
therefore he wanted to deal with them in saintliness. This kind of
saintliness, however, is not for a ksatriya. Although a responsible man
in the administration of a state is required to be saintly, he should
not be cowardly. For example, Lord Rama was so saintly that people were
anxious to live in His kingdom (rama-rajya), but Lord Rama never showed
any cowardice. Ravana was an aggressor against Rama because He
kidnapped Rama's wife, Sita, but Lord Rama gave him sufficient lessons,
unparalleled in the history of the world. In Arjuna's case, however,
one should consider the special type of aggressors, namely his own
grandfather, own teacher, friends, sons, grandsons, etc. Because of
them, Arjuna thought that he should not take the severe steps necessary
against ordinary aggressors. Besides that, saintly persons are advised
to forgive. Such injunctions for saintly persons are more important
than any political emergency. Arjuna considered that rather than kill
his own kinsmen for political reasons, it would be better to forgive
them on grounds of religion and saintly behavior. He did not,
therefore, consider such killing profitable simply for the matter of
temporary bodily happiness. After all, kingdoms and pleasures derived
therefrom are not permanent, so why should he risk his life and eternal
salvation by killing his own kinsmen? Arjuna's addressing of Krsna as
"Madhava," or the husband of the goddess of fortune, is also
significant in this connection. He wanted to point out to Krsna that,
as husband of the goddess of fortune, He should not induce Arjuna to
take up a matter which would ultimately bring about misfortune. Krsna,
however, never brings misfortune to anyone, to say nothing of His
devotees.

TEXTS 37-38

yady apy ete na pasyanti
lobhopahata-cetasah
kula-ksaya-krtam dosam
mitra-drohe ca patakam

katham na jneyam asmabhih
papad asman nivartitum
kula-ksaya-krtam dosam
prapasyadbhir janardana

SYNONYMS

yadi--if; api--certainly; ete--they; na--do not; pasyanti--see; lobha--
greed; upahata--overpowered; cetasah--the hearts; kula-ksaya--in
killing the family; krtam--done; dosam--fault; mitra-drohe--quarreling
with friends; ca--also; patakam--sinful reactions; katham--why; na--
shall not; jneyam--know this; asmabhih--by us; papat--from sins; asmat-



-ourselves; nivartitum--to cease; kula-ksaya--the destruction of a
dynasty; krtam--by so doing; dosam--crime; prapasyadbhih--by those who
can see; janardana--O Krsna.

TRANSLATION

O Janardana, although these men, overtaken by greed, see no fault in
killing one's family or quarreling with friends, why should we, with
knowledge of the sin, engage in these acts?

PURPORT

A ksatriya is not supposed to refuse to battle or gamble when he is so
invited by some rival party. Under such obligation, Arjuna could not
refuse to fight because he was challenged by the party of Duryodhana.
In this connection, Arjuna considered that the other party might be
blind to the effects of such a challenge. Arjuna, however, could see
the evil consequences and could not accept the challenge. Obligation is
actually binding when the effect is good, but when the effect is
otherwise, then no one can be bound. Considering all these pros and
cons, Arjuna decided not to fight.

TEXT 39

kula-ksaye pranasyanti
kula-dharmah sanatanah
dharme naste kulam krtsnam
adharmo 'bhibhavaty uta

SYNONYMS

kula-ksaye--in destroying the family; pranasyanti--becomes vanquished;
kula-dharmah--the family traditions; sanatanah--eternal; dharme--in
religion; naste--being destroyed; kulam--family; krtsnam--wholesale;
adharmah--irreligious; abhibhavati--transforms; uta--it is said.

TRANSLATION

With the destruction of dynasty, the eternal family tradition is
vanquished, and thus the rest of the family becomes involved in
irreligious practice.

PURPORT

In the system of the varnasrama institution there are many principles
of religious traditions to help members of the family grow properly and
attain spiritual values. The elder members are responsible for such
purifying processes in the family, beginning from birth to death. But
on the death of the elder members, such family traditions of
purification may stop, and the remaining younger family members may
develop irreligious habits and thereby lose their chance for spiritual
salvation. Therefore, for no purpose should the elder members of the
family be slain.

TEXT 40

adharmabhibhavat krsna
pradusyanti kula-striyah



strisu dustasu varsneya
jayate varna-sankarah

SYNONYMS

adharma--irreligion; abhibhavat--having become predominant; krsna--O
Krsna; pradusyanti--become polluted; kula-striyah--family ladies;
strisu--of the womanhood; dustasu--being so polluted; varsneya--O
descendant of Vrsni; jayate--it so becomes; varna-sankarah--unwanted
progeny.

TRANSLATION

When irreligion is prominent in the family, O Krsna, the women of the
family become corrupt, and from the degradation of womanhood, O
descendant of Vrsni, comes unwanted progeny.

PURPORT

Good population in human society is the basic principle for peace,
prosperity and spiritual progress in life. The varnasrama religion's
principles were so designed that the good population would prevail in
society for the general spiritual progress of state and community. Such
population depends on the chastity and faithfulness of its womanhood.
As children are very prone to be misled, women are similarly very prone
to degradation. Therefore, both children and women require protection
by the elder members of the family. By being engaged in various
religious practices, women will not be misled into adultery. According
to Canakya Pandita, women are generally not very intelligent and
therefore not trustworthy. So, the different family traditions of
religious activities should always engage them, and thus their chastity
and devotion will give birth to a good population eligible for
participating in the varnasrama system. On the failure of such
varnasrama-dharma, naturally the women become free to act and mix with
men, and thus adultery is indulged in at the risk of unwanted
population. Irresponsible men also provoke adultery in society, and
thus unwanted children flood the human race at the risk of war and
pestilence.

TEXT 41

sankaro narakayaiva
kula-ghnanam kulasya ca
patanti pitaro hy esam
lupta-pindodaka-kriyah

SYNONYMS

sankarah--such unwanted children; narakaya--for hellish life; eva--
certainly; kula-ghnanam--of those who are killers of the family;
kulasya--of the family; ca--also; patanti--fall down; pitarah--
forefathers; hi--certainly; esam--of them; lupta--stopped; pinda--
offerings; udaka--water; kriyah--performances.

TRANSLATION

When there is increase of unwanted population, a hellish situation is
created both for the family and for those who destroy the family



tradition. In such corrupt families, there is no offering of oblations
of food and water to the ancestors.

PURPORT

According to the rules and regulations of fruitive activities, there is
a need to offer periodical food and water to the forefathers of the
family. This offering is performed by worship of Visnu, because eating
the remnants of food offered to Visnu can deliver one from all kinds of
sinful actions. Sometimes the forefathers may be suffering from various
types of sinful reactions, and sometimes some of them cannot even
acquire a gross material body and are forced to remain in subtle bodies
as ghosts. Thus, when remnants of prasadam food are offered to
forefathers by descendants, the forefathers are released from ghostly
or other kinds of miserable life. Such help rendered to forefathers is
a family tradition, and those who are not in devotional life are
required to perform such rituals. One who is engaged in the devotional
life is not required to perform such actions. Simply by performing
devotional service, one can deliver hundreds and thousands of
forefathers from all kinds of misery. It is stated in the Bhagavatam
(11.5.41):

devarsi-bhutapta-nrnam pitrnam
na kinkaro nayam rni ca rajan
sarvatmana yah saranam saranyam
gato mukundam parihrtya kartam

"Anyone who has taken shelter of the lotus feet of Mukunda, the giver
of liberation, giving up all kinds of obligation, and has taken to the
path in all seriousness, owes neither duties nor obligations to the
demigods, sages, general living entities, family members, humankind or
forefathers." Such obligations are automatically fulfilled by
performance of devotional service to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.

TEXT 42

dosair etaih kula-ghnanam
varna-sankara-karakaih
utsadyante jati-dharmah
kula-dharmas ca sasvatah

SYNONYMS

dosaih--by such faults; etaih--all these; kula-ghnanam--of the
destroyer of the family; varna-sankara--unwanted children; karakaih--by
the doers; utsadyante--causes devastation; jati-dharmah--community
projects; kula-dharmah--family traditions; ca--also; sasvatah--eternal.

TRANSLATION

Due to the evil deeds of the destroyers of family tradition, all kinds
of community projects and family welfare activities are devastated.

PURPORT

The four orders of human society, combined with family welfare
activities as they are set forth by the institution of the sanatana-



dharma or varnasrama-dharma, are designed to enable the human being to
attain his ultimate salvation. Therefore, the breaking of the sanatana-
dharma tradition by irresponsible leaders of society brings about chaos
in that society, and consequently people forget the aim of life--Visnu.
Such leaders are called blind, and persons who follow such leaders are
sure to be led into chaos.

TEXT 43

utsanna-kula-dharmanam
manusyanam janardana
narake niyatam vaso
bhavatity anususruma

SYNONYMS

utsanna--spoiled; kula-dharmanam--of those who have the family
traditions; manusyanam--of such men; janardana--O Krsna; narake--in
hell; niyatam--always; vasah--residence; bhavati--it so becomes; iti--
thus; anususruma--I have heard by disciplic succession.

TRANSLATION

O Krsna, maintainer of the people, I have heard by disciplic succession
that those who destroy family traditions dwell always in hell.

PURPORT

Arjuna bases his argument not on his own personal experience, but on
what he has heard from the authorities. That is the way of receiving
real knowledge. One cannot reach the real point of factual knowledge
without being helped by the right person who is already established in
that knowledge. There is a system in the varnasrama institution by
which one has to undergo the process of atonement before death for his
sinful activities. One who is always engaged in sinful activities must
utilize the process of atonement called the prayascitta. Without doing
so, one surely will be transferred to hellish planets to undergo
miserable lives as the result of sinful activities.

TEXT 44

aho bata mahat papam
kartum vyavasita vayam
yad rajya-sukha-lobhena
hantum sva-janam udyatah

SYNONYMS

aho--alas; bata--how strange it is; mahat--great; papam--sins; kartum--
to perform; vyavasitah--decided; vayam--we; yat--so that; rajya--
kingdom; sukha-lobhena--driven by greed for royal happiness; hantum--to
kill; sva-janam--kinsmen; udyatah--trying for.

TRANSLATION

Alas, how strange it is that we are preparing to commit greatly sinful
acts, driven by the desire to enjoy royal happiness.



PURPORT

Driven by selfish motives, one may be inclined to such sinful acts as
the killing of one's own brother, father or mother. There are many such
instances in the history of the world. But Arjuna, being a saintly
devotee of the Lord, is always conscious of moral principles and
therefore takes care to avoid such activities.

TEXT 45

yadi mam apratikaram
asastram sastra-panayah
dhartarastra rane hanyus
tan me ksemataram bhavet

SYNONYMS

yadi--even if; mam--unto me; apratikaram--without being resistant;
asastram--without being fully equipped; sastra-panayah--those with
weapons in hand; dhartarastrah--the sons of Dhrtarastra; rane--in the
battlefield; hanyuh--may kill; tat--that; me--mine; ksema-taram--
better; bhavet--become.

TRANSLATION

I would consider it better for the sons of Dhrtarastra to kill me
unarmed and unresisting, rather than to fight with them.

PURPORT

It is the custom--according to ksatriya fighting principles--that an
unarmed and unwilling foe should not be attacked. Arjuna, however, in
such an enigmatic position, decided he would not fight if he were
attacked by the enemy. He did not consider how much the other party was
bent upon fighting. All these symptoms are due to soft-heartedness
resulting from his being a great devotee of the Lord.

TEXT 46

sanjaya uvaca
evam uktvarjunah sankhye
rathopastha upavisat
visrjya sa-saram capam
soka-samvigna-manasah

SYNONYMS

sanjayah--Sanjaya; uvaca--said; evam--thus; uktva--saying; arjunah--
Arjuna; sankhye--in the battlefield; ratha--chariot; upasthe--situated
on; upavisat--sat down again; visrjya--keeping aside; sa-saram--along
with arrows; capam--the bow; soka--by lamentation; samvigna--
distressed; manasah--within the mind.

TRANSLATION

Sanjaya said: Arjuna, having thus spoken on the battlefield, cast aside
his bow and arrows and sat down on the chariot, his mind overwhelmed
with grief.



PURPORT

While observing the situation of his enemy, Arjuna stood up on the
chariot, but he was so afflicted with lamentation that he sat down
again, setting aside his bow and arrows. Such a kind and soft-hearted
person, in the devotional service of the Lord, is fit to receive self-
knowledge.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the First Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Observing the Armies on the Battlefield
of Kuruksetra.

Chapter 2
Contents of the Gita Summarized

TEXT 1

sanjaya uvaca
tam tatha krpayavistam
asru-purnakuleksanam
visidantam idam vakyam
uvaca madhusudanah

SYNONYMS

sanjayah uvaca--Sanjaya said; tam--unto Arjuna; tatha--thus; krpaya--by
compassion; avistam--overwhelmed; asru-purna--full of tears; akula--
depressed; iksanam--eyes; visidantam--lamenting; idam--this; vakyam--
words; uvaca--said; madhu-sudanah--the killer of Madhu.

TRANSLATION

Sanjaya said: Seeing Arjuna full of compassion and very sorrowful, his
eyes brimming with tears, Madhusudana, Krsna, spoke the following
words.

PURPORT

Material compassion, lamentation and tears are all signs of ignorance
of the real self. Compassion for the eternal soul is self-realization.
The word "Madhusudana" is significant in this verse. Lord Krsna killed
the demon Madhu, and now Arjuna wanted Krsna to kill the demon of
misunderstanding that had overtaken him in the discharge of his duty.
No one knows where compassion should be applied. Compassion for the
dress of a drowning man is senseless. A man fallen in the ocean of
nescience cannot be saved simply by rescuing his outward dress--the
gross material body. One who does not know this and laments for the
outward dress is called a sudra, or one who laments unnecessarily.
Arjuna was a ksatriya, and this conduct was not expected from him. Lord
Krsna, however, can dissipate the lamentation of the ignorant man, and
for this purpose the Bhagavad-gita was sung by Him. This chapter
instructs us in self-realization by an analytical study of the material
body and the spirit soul, as explained by the supreme authority, Lord
Sri Krsna. This realization is made possible by working with the
fruitive being situated in the fixed conception of the real self.

TEXT 2



sri-bhagavan uvaca
kutas tva kasmalam idam
visame samupasthitam
anarya-justam asvargyam
akirti-karam arjuna

SYNONYMS

sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; kutah--
wherefrom; tva--unto you; kasmalam--dirtiness; idam--this lamentation;
visame--in this hour of crisis; samupasthitam--arrived; anarya--persons
who do not know the value of life; justam--practiced by; asvargyam--
that which does not lead to higher planets; akirti--infamy; karam--the
cause of; arjuna--O Arjuna.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Person [Bhagavan] said: My dear Arjuna, how have these
impurities come upon you? They are not at all befitting a man who knows
the progressive values of life. They lead not to higher planets, but to
infamy.

PURPORT

Krsna and the Supreme Personality of Godhead are identical. Therefore
Lord Krsna is referred to as "Bhagavan" throughout the Gita. Bhagavan
is the ultimate in Absolute Truth. Absolute Truth is realized in three
phases of understanding, namely Brahman, or the impersonal all-
pervasive spirit; Paramatma, or the localized aspect of the Supreme
within the heart of all living entities; and Bhagavan, or the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Lord Krsna. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.2.11)
this conception of the Absolute Truth is explained thus:

vadanti tat tattva-vidas
tattvam yaj jnanam advayam
brahmeti paramatmeti
bhagavan iti sabdyate

"The Absolute Truth is realized in three phases of understanding by the
knower of the Absolute Truth, and all of them are identical. Such
phases of the Absolute Truth are expressed as Brahman, Paramatma, and
Bhagavan."
These three divine aspects can be explained by the example of the sun,
which also has three different aspects, namely the sunshine, the sun's
surface and the sun planet itself. One who studies the sunshine only is
the preliminary student. One who understands the sun's surface is
further advanced. And one who can enter into the sun planet is the
highest. Ordinary students who are satisfied simply by understanding
the sunshine--its universal pervasiveness and the glaring effulgence of
its impersonal nature--may be compared to those who can realize only
the Brahman feature of the Absolute Truth. The student who has advanced
still further can know the sun disc, which is compared to knowledge of
the Paramatma feature of the Absolute Truth. And the student who can
enter into the heart of the sun planet is compared to those who realize
the personal features of the Supreme Absolute Truth. Therefore, the
bhaktas, or the transcendentalists who have realized the Bhagavan
feature of the Absolute Truth, are the topmost transcendentalists,



although all students who are engaged in the study of the Absolute
Truth are engaged in the same subject matter. The sunshine, the sun
disc and the inner affairs of the sun planet cannot be separated from
one another, and yet the students of the three different phases are not
in the same category.
The Sanskrit word bhagavan is explained by the great authority,
Parasara Muni, the father of Vyasadeva. The Supreme Personality who
possesses all riches, all strength, all fame, all beauty, all knowledge
and all renunciation is called Bhagavan. There are many persons who are
very rich, very powerful, very beautiful, very famous, very learned,
and very much detached, but no one can claim that he possesses all
riches, all strength, etc., entirely. Only Krsna can claim this because
He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. No living entity, including
Brahma, Lord Siva, or Narayana, can possess opulences as fully as
Krsna. Therefore it is concluded in the Brahma-samhita by Lord Brahma
himself that Lord Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. No one
is equal to or above Him. He is the primeval Lord, or Bhagavan, known
as Govinda, and He is the supreme cause of all causes:

isvarah paramah krsnah
sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah
anadir adir govindah
sarva-karana-karanam

"There are many personalities possessing the qualities of Bhagavan, but
Krsna is the supreme because none can excel Him. He is the Supreme
Person, and His body is eternal, full of knowledge and bliss. He is the
primeval Lord Govinda and the cause of all causes." (Brahma-samhita
5.1)
In the Bhagavatam also there is a list of many incarnations of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, but Krsna is described as the original
Personality of Godhead, from whom many, many incarnations and
Personalities of Godhead expand:

ete camsa-kalah pumsah
krsnas tu bhagavan svayam
indrari-vyakulam lokam
mrdayanti yuge yuge

"All the lists of the incarnations of Godhead submitted herewith are
either plenary expansions or parts of the plenary expansions of the
Supreme Godhead, but Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Himself." (Bhag. 1.3.28)
Therefore, Krsna is the original Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
Absolute Truth, the source of both the Supersoul and the impersonal
Brahman.
In the presence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Arjuna's
lamentation for his kinsmen is certainly unbecoming, and therefore
Krsna expressed His surprise with the word kutas, "wherefrom." Such
unmanly sentiments were never expected from a person belonging to the
civilized class of men known as Aryans. The word Aryan is applicable to
persons who know the value of life and have a civilization based on
spiritual realization. Persons who are led by the material conception
of life do not know that the aim of life is realization of the Absolute
Truth, Visnu, or Bhagavan, and they are captivated by the external
features of the material world, and therefore they do not know what
liberation is. Persons who have no knowledge of liberation from
material bondage are called non-Aryans. Although Arjuna was a ksatriya,



he was deviating from his prescribed duties by declining to fight. This
act of cowardice is described as befitting the non-Aryans. Such
deviation from duty does not help one in the progress of spiritual
life, nor does it even give one the opportunity to become famous in
this world. Lord Krsna did not approve of the so-called compassion of
Arjuna for his kinsmen.

TEXT 3

klaibyam ma sma gamah partha
naitat tvayy upapadyate
ksudram hrdaya-daurbalyam
tyaktvottistha parantapa

SYNONYMS

klaibyam--impotence; ma--do not; sma--take it; gamah--go in; partha--O
son of Prtha; na--never; etat--like this; tvayi--unto you; upadyate--is
befitting; ksudram--very little; hrdaya--heart; daurbalyam--weakness;
tyaktva--giving up; uttistha--get up; param-tapa--O chastiser of the
enemies.

TRANSLATION

O son of Prtha, do not yield to this degrading impotence. It does not
become you. Give up such petty weakness of heart and arise, O chastiser
of the enemy.

PURPORT

Arjuna was addressed as "the son of Prtha," who happened to be the
sister of Krsna's father Vasudeva. Therefore Arjuna had a blood
relationship with Krsna. If the son of a ksatriya declines to fight, he
is a ksatriya in name only, and if the son of a brahmana acts
impiously, he is a brahmana in name only. Such ksatriyas and brahmanas
are unworthy sons of their fathers; therefore, Krsna did not want
Arjuna to become an unworthy son of a ksatriya. Arjuna was the most
intimate friend of Krsna, and Krsna was directly guiding him on the
chariot; but in spite of all these credits, if Arjuna abandoned the
battle, he would be committing an infamous act; therefore Krsna said
that such an attitude in Arjuna did not fit his personality. Arjuna
might argue that he would give up the battle on the grounds of his
magnanimous attitude for the most respectable Bhisma and his relatives,
but Krsna considered that sort of magnanimity not approved by
authority. Therefore, such magnanimity or so-called nonviolence should
be given up by persons like Arjuna under the direct guidance of Krsna.

TEXT 4

arjuna uvaca
katham bhismam aham sankhye
dronam ca madhusudana
isubhih pratiyotsyami
pujarhav ari-sudana

SYNONYMS



arjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; katham--how; bhismam--unto Bhisma; aham--I;
sankhye--in the fight; dronam--unto Drona; ca--also; madhu-sudana--O
killer of Madhu; isubhih--with arrows; pratiyotsyami--shall
counterattack; puja-arhau--those who are worshipable; ari-sudana--O
killer of the enemies.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: O killer of Madhu [Krsna], how can I counterattack with
arrows in battle men like Bhisma and Drona, who are worthy of my
worship?

PURPORT

Respectable superiors like Bhisma the grandfather and Dronacarya the
teacher are always worshipable. Even if they attack, they should not be
counterattacked. It is general etiquette that superiors are not to be
offered even a verbal fight. Even if they are sometimes harsh in
behavior, they should not be harshly treated. Then, how is it possible
for Arjuna to counterattack them? Would Krsna ever attack His own
grandfather, Ugrasena, or His teacher, Sandipani Muni? These were some
of the arguments by Arjuna to Krsna.

TEXT 5

gurun ahatva hi mahanubhavan
sreyo bhoktum bhaiksyam apiha loke
hatvartha-kamams tu gurun ihaiva
bhunjiya bhogan rudhira-pradigdhan

SYNONYMS

gurun--the superiors; ahatva--not killing; hi--certainly; maha-
anubhavan--great souls; sreyah--it is better; bhoktum--to enjoy life;
bhaiksyam--begging; api--even; iha--in this life; loke--in this world;
hatva--killing; artha--gain; kaman--so desiring; tu--but; gurun--
superiors; iha--in this world; eva--certainly; bhunjiya--has to enjoy;
bhogan--enjoyable things; rudhira--blood; pradigdhan--tainted with.

TRANSLATION

It is better to live in this world by begging than to live at the cost
of the lives of great souls who are my teachers. Even though they are
avaricious, they are nonetheless superiors. If they are killed, our
spoils will be tainted with blood.

PURPORT

According to scriptural codes, a teacher who engages in an abominable
action and has lost his sense of discrimination is fit to be abandoned.
Bhisma and Drona were obliged to take the side of Duryodhana because of
his financial assistance, although they should not have accepted such a
position simply on financial considerations. Under the circumstances,
they have lost the respectability of teachers. But Arjuna thinks that
nevertheless they remain his superiors, and therefore to enjoy material
profits after killing them would mean to enjoy spoils tainted with
blood.



TEXT 6

na caitad vidmah kataran no gariyo
yad va jayema yadi va no jayeyuh
yan eva hatva na jijivisamas
te 'vasthitah pramukhe dhartarastrah

SYNONYMS

na--nor; ca--also; etat--this; vidmah--do know; katarat--which; nah--
us; gariyah--better; yat--what; va--either; jayema--conquer us; yadi--
if; va--or; nah--us; jayeyuh--conquer; yan--those; eva--certainly;
hatva--by killing; na--never; jijivisamah--want to live; te--all of
them; avasthitah--are situated; pramukhe--in the front; dhartarastrah--
the sons of Dhrtarastra.

TRANSLATION

Nor do we know which is better--conquering them or being conquered by
them. The sons of Dhrtarastra, whom if we kill we should not care to
live, are now standing before us on this battlefield.

PURPORT

Arjuna did not know whether he should fight and risk unnecessary
violence, although fighting is the duty of the ksatriyas, or whether he
should refrain and live by begging. If he did not conquer the enemy,
begging would be his only means of subsistence. Nor was there certainty
of victory, because either side might emerge victorious. Even if
victory awaited them (and their cause was justified), still, if the
sons of Dhrtarastra died in battle, it would be very difficult to live
in their absence. Under the circumstances, that would be another kind
of defeat for them. All these considerations by Arjuna definitely
proved that he was not only a great devotee of the Lord but he was also
highly enlightened and had complete control over his mind and senses.
His desire to live by begging, although he was born in the royal
household, is another sign of detachment. He was truly virtuous, as
these qualities, combined with his faith in the words of instruction of
Sri Krsna (his spiritual master), indicate. It is concluded that Arjuna
was quite fit for liberation. Unless the senses are controlled, there
is no chance of elevation to the platform of knowledge, and without
knowledge and devotion there is no chance of liberation. Arjuna was
competent in all these attributes, over and above his enormous
attributes in his material relationships.

TEXT 7

karpanya-dosopahata-svabhavah
prcchami tvam dharma-sammudha-cetah
yac chreyah syan niscitam bruhi tan me
sisyas te 'ham sadhi mam tvam prapannam

SYNONYMS

karpanya--miserly; dosa--weakness; upahata--being inflicted by; sva-
bhavah--characteristics; prcchami--I am asking; tvam--unto You; dharma-
-religion; sammudha--bewildered; cetah--in heart; yat--what; sreyah--
all-good; syat--may be; niscitam--confidently; bruhi--tell; tat--that;



me--unto me; sisyah--disciple; te--Your; aham--I am; sadhi--just
instruct; mam--me; tvam--unto You; prapannam--surrendered.

TRANSLATION

Now I am confused about my duty and have lost all composure because of
weakness. In this condition I am asking You to tell me clearly what is
best for me. Now I am Your disciple, and a soul surrendered unto You.
Please instruct me.

PURPORT

By nature's own way the complete system of material activities is a
source of perplexity for everyone. In every step there is perplexity,
and therefore it behooves one to approach a bona fide spiritual master
who can give one proper guidance for executing the purpose of life. All
Vedic literatures advise us to approach a bona fide spiritual master to
get free from the perplexities of life which happen without our desire.
They are like a forest fire that somehow blazes without being set by
anyone. Similarly, the world situation is such that perplexities of
life automatically appear, without our wanting such confusion. No one
wants fire, and yet it takes place, and we become perplexed. The Vedic
wisdom therefore advises that in order to solve the perplexities of
life and to understand the science of the solution, one must approach a
spiritual master who is in the disciplic succession. A person with a
bona fide spiritual master is supposed to know everything. One should
not, therefore, remain in material perplexities but should approach a
spiritual master. This is the purport of this verse.
Who is the man in material perplexities? It is he who does not
understand the problems of life. In the Garga Upanisad the perplexed
man is described as follows: yo va etad aksaram gargy aviditvasmal
lokat praiti sa krpanah. "He is a miserly man who does not solve the
problems of life as a human and who thus quits this world like the cats
and dogs, without understanding the science of self-realization." This
human form of life is a most valuable asset for the living entity who
can utilize it for solving the problems of life; therefore, one who
does not utilize this opportunity properly is a miser. On the other
hand, there is the brahmana, or he who is intelligent enough to utilize
this body to solve all the problems of life.
The krpanas, or miserly persons, waste their time in being overly
affectionate for family, society, country, etc., in the material
conception of life. One is often attached to family life, namely to
wife, children and other members, on the basis of "skin disease." The
krpana thinks that he is able to protect his family members from death;
or the krpana thinks that his family or society can save him from the
verge of death. Such family attachment can be found even in the lower
animals who take care of children also. Being intelligent, Arjuna could
understand that his affection for family members and his wish to
protect them from death were the causes of his perplexities. Although
he could understand that his duty to fight was awaiting him, still, on
account of miserly weakness, he could not discharge the duties. He is
therefore asking Lord Krsna, the supreme spiritual master, to make a
definite solution. He offers himself to Krsna as a disciple. He wants
to stop friendly talks. Talks between the master and the disciple are
serious, and now Arjuna wants to talk very seriously before the
recognized spiritual master. Krsna is therefore the original spiritual
master of the science of Bhagavad-gita, and Arjuna is the first
disciple for understanding the Gita. How Arjuna understands the



Bhagavad-gita is stated in the Gita itself. And yet foolish mundane
scholars explain that one need not submit to Krsna as a person, but to
"the unborn within Krsna." There is no difference between Krsna's
within and without. And one who has no sense of this understanding is
the greatest fool in trying to understand Bhagavad-gita.

TEXT 8

na hi prapasyami mamapanudyad
yac chokam ucchosanam indriyanam
avapya bhumav asapatnam rddham
rajyam suranam api cadhipatyam

SYNONYMS

na--do not; hi--certainly; prapasyami--I see; mama--my; apanudyat--can
drive away; yat--that; sokam--lamentation; ucchosanam--drying up;
indriyanam--of the senses; avapya--achieving; bhumau--on the earth;
asapatnam--without rival; rddham--prosperous; rajyam--kingdom; suranam-
-of the demigods; api--even; ca--also; adhipatyam--supremacy.

TRANSLATION

I can find no means to drive away this grief which is drying up my
senses. I will not be able to destroy it even if I win an unrivaled
kingdom on earth with sovereignty like the demigods in heaven.

PURPORT

Although Arjuna was putting forward so many arguments based on
knowledge of the principles of religion and moral codes, it appears
that he was unable to solve his real problem without the help of the
spiritual master, Lord Sri Krsna. He could understand that his so-
called knowledge was useless in driving away his problems, which were
drying up his whole existence; and it was impossible for him to solve
such perplexities without the help of a spiritual master like Lord
Krsna. Academic knowledge, scholarship, high position, etc., are all
useless in solving the problems of life; help can only be given by a
spiritual master like Krsna. Therefore, the conclusion is that a
spiritual master who is one hundred percent Krsna conscious is the bona
fide spiritual master, for he can solve the problems of life. Lord
Caitanya said that one who is master in the science of Krsna
consciousness, regardless of his social position, is the real spiritual
master.

kiba vipra, kiba nyasi, sudra kene naya
yei krsna-tattva-vetta, sei 'guru' haya

"It does not matter whether a person is a vipra [learned scholar in
Vedic wisdom] or is born in a lower family, or is in the renounced
order of life--if he is master in the science of Krsna, he is the
perfect and bona fide spiritual master." (Caitanya-caritamrta, Madhya
8.128) So without being a master in the science of Krsna consciousness,
no one is a bona fide spiritual master. It is also said in the Vedic
literatures:

sat-karma-nipuno vipro
mantra-tantra-visaradah



avaisnavo gurur na syad
vaisnavah sva-paco guruh

"A scholarly brahmana, expert in all subjects of Vedic knowledge, is
unfit to become a spiritual master without being a Vaisnava, or expert
in the science of Krsna consciousness. But a person born in a family of
a lower caste can become a spiritual master if he is a Vaisnava, or
Krsna conscious." (Padma Purana)
The problems of material existence--birth, old age, disease and death--
cannot be counteracted by accumulation of wealth and economic
development. In many parts of the world there are states which are
replete with all facilities of life, which are full of wealth and
economically developed, yet the problems of material existence are
still present. They are seeking peace in different ways, but they can
achieve real happiness only if they consult Krsna, or the Bhagavad-gita
and Srimad-Bhagavatam--which constitute the science of Krsna--or the
bona fide representative of Krsna, the man in Krsna consciousness.
If economic development and material comforts could drive away one's
lamentations for family, social, national or international inebrieties,
then Arjuna would not have said that even an unrivaled kingdom on earth
or supremacy like that of the demigods in the heavenly planets would
not be able to drive away his lamentations. He sought, therefore,
refuge in Krsna consciousness, and that is the right path for peace and
harmony. Economic development or supremacy over the world can be
finished at any moment by the cataclysms of material nature. Even
elevation into a higher planetary situation, as men are now seeking a
place on the moon planet, can also be finished at one stroke. The
Bhagavad-gita confirms this: ksine punye martya-lokam visanti. "When
the results of pious activities are finished, one falls down again from
the peak of happiness to the lowest status of life." Many politicians
of the world have fallen down in that way. Such downfalls only
constitute more causes for lamentation.
Therefore, if we want to curb lamentation for good, then we have to
take shelter of Krsna, as Arjuna is seeking to do. So Arjuna asked
Krsna to solve his problem definitely, and that is the way of Krsna
consciousness.

TEXT 9

sanjaya uvaca
evam uktva hrsikesam
gudakesah parantapah
na yotsya iti govindam
uktva tusnim babhuva ha

SYNONYMS

sanjayah uvaca--Sanjaya said; evam--thus; uktva--speaking; hrsikesam--
unto Krsna, the master of the senses; gudakesah--Arjuna, the master at
curbing ignorance; parantapah--the chastiser of the enemies; na yotsye-
-I shall not fight; iti--thus; govindam--unto Krsna, the giver of
pleasure; uktva--saying; tusnim--silent; babhuva--became; ha--
certainly.

TRANSLATION

Sanjaya said: Having spoken thus, Arjuna, chastiser of enemies, told
Krsna, "Govinda, I shall not fight," and fell silent.



PURPORT

Dhrtarastra must have been very glad to understand that Arjuna was not
going to fight and was instead leaving the battlefield for the begging
profession. But Sanjaya disappointed him again in relating that Arjuna
was competent to kill his enemies (parantapah). Although Arjuna was,
for the time being, overwhelmed with false grief due to family
affection, he surrendered unto Krsna, the supreme spiritual master, as
a disciple. This indicated that he would soon be free from the false
lamentation resulting from family affection and would be enlightened
with perfect knowledge of self-realization, or Krsna consciousness, and
would then surely fight. Thus Dhrtarastra's joy would be frustrated,
since Arjuna would be enlightened by Krsna and would fight to the end.

TEXT 10

tam uvaca hrsikesah
prahasann iva bharata
senayor ubhayor madhye
visidantam, idam vacah

SYNONYMS

tam--unto him; uvaca--said; hrsikesah--the master of the senses, Krsna;
prahasan--smiling; iva--like that; bharata--O Dhrtarastra, descendant
of Bharata; senayoh--of the armies; ubhayoh--of both parties; madhye--
between; visidantam--unto the lamenting one; idam--the following;
vacah--words.

TRANSLATION

O descendant of Bharata, at that time Krsna, smiling, in the midst of
both the armies, spoke the following words to the grief-stricken
Arjuna.

PURPORT

The talk was going on between intimate friends, namely the Hrsikesa and
the Gudakesa. As friends, both of them were on the same level, but one
of them voluntarily became a student of the other. Krsna was smiling
because a friend had chosen to become a disciple. As Lord of all, He is
always in the superior position as the master of everyone, and yet the
Lord accepts one who wishes to be a friend, a son, a lover or a
devotee, or who wants Him in such a role. But when He was accepted as
the master, He at once assumed the role and talked with the disciple
like the master--with gravity, as it is required. It appears that the
talk between the master and the disciple was openly exchanged in the
presence of both armies so that all were benefited. So the talks of
Bhagavad-gita are not for any particular person, society, or community,
but they are for all, and friends or enemies are equally entitled to
hear them.

TEXT 11

sri-bhagavan uvaca
asocyan anvasocas tvam
prajna-vadams ca bhasase



gatasun agatasums ca
nanusocanti panditah

SYNONYMS

sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; asocyan--
that which is not worthy of lamentation; anvasocah--you are lamenting;
tvam--you; prajna-vadan--learned talks; ca--also; bhasase--speaking;
gata--lost; asun--life; agata--not past; asun--life; ca--also; na--
never; anusocanti--lament; panditah--the learned.

TRANSLATION

The Blessed Lord said: While speaking learned words, you are mourning
for what is not worthy of grief. Those who are wise lament neither for
the living nor the dead.

PURPORT

The Lord at once took the position of the teacher and chastised the
student, calling him, indirectly, a fool. The Lord said, "You are
talking like a learned man, but you do not know that one who is
learned--one who knows what is body and what is soul--does not lament
for any stage of the body, neither in the living nor in the dead
condition." As it will be explained in later chapters, it will be clear
that knowledge means to know matter and spirit and the controller of
both. Arjuna argued that religious principles should be given more
importance than politics or sociology, but he did not know that
knowledge of matter, soul and the Supreme is even more important than
religious formularies. And, because he was lacking in that knowledge,
he should not have posed himself as a very learned man. As he did not
happen to be a very learned man, he was consequently lamenting for
something which was unworthy of lamentation. The body is born and is
destined to be vanquished today or tomorrow; therefore the body is not
as important as the soul. One who knows this is actually learned, and
for him there is no cause for lamentation, regardless of the condition
of the material body.

TEXT 12

na tv evaham jatu nasam
na tvam neme janadhipah
na caiva na bhavisyamah
sarve vayam atah param

SYNONYMS

na--never; tu--but; eva--certainly; aham--I; jatu--become; na--never;
asam--existed; na--it is not so; tvam--yourself; na--not; ime--all
these; jana-adhipah--kings; na--never; ca--also; eva--certainly; na--
not like that; bhavisyamah--shall exist; sarve--all of us; vayam--we;
atah param--hereafter.

TRANSLATION

Never was there a time when I did not exist, nor you, nor all these
kings; nor in the future shall any of us cease to be.



PURPORT

In the Vedas, in the Katha Upanisad as well as in the Svetasvatara
Upanisad, it is said that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the
maintainer of innumerable living entities, in terms of their different
situations according to individual work and reaction of work. That
Supreme Personality of Godhead is also, by His plenary portions, alive
in the heart of every living entity. Only saintly persons who can see,
within and without, the same Supreme Lord, can actually attain to
perfect and eternal peace.

nityo nityanam cetanas cetananam
eko bahunam yo vidadhati kaman
tam atma-stham ye 'nupasyanti dhiras
tesam santih sasvati netaresam

The same Vedic truth given to Arjuna is given to all persons in the
world who pose themselves as very learned but factually have but a poor
fund of knowledge. The Lord says clearly that He Himself, Arjuna, and
all the kings who are assembled on the battlefield, are eternally
individual beings and that the Lord is eternally the maintainer of the
individual living entities both in their conditioned as well as in
their liberated situations. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the
supreme individual person, and Arjuna, the Lord's eternal associate,
and all the kings assembled there are individual, eternal persons. It
is not that they did not exist as individuals in the past, and it is
not that they will not remain eternal persons. Their individuality
existed in the past, and their individuality will continue in the
future without interruption. Therefore, there is no cause for
lamentation for anyone.
The Mayavadi theory that after liberation the individual soul,
separated by the covering of maya or illusion, will merge into the
impersonal Brahman and lose its individual existence is not supported
herein by Lord Krsna, the supreme authority. Nor is the theory that we
only think of individuality in the conditioned state supported herein.
Krsna clearly says herein that in the future also the individuality of
the Lord and others, as it is confirmed in the Upanisads, will continue
eternally. This statement of Krsna is authoritative because Krsna
cannot be subject to illusion. If individuality is not a fact, then
Krsna would not have stressed it so much--even for the future. The
Mayavadi may argue that the individuality spoken of by Krsna is not
spiritual, but material. Even accepting the argument that the
individuality is material, then how can one distinguish Krsna's
individuality? Krsna affirms His individuality in the past and confirms
His individuality in the future also. He has confirmed His
individuality in many ways, and impersonal Brahman has been declared to
be subordinate to Him. Krsna has maintained spiritual individuality all
along; if He is accepted as an ordinary conditioned soul in individual
consciousness, then His Bhagavad-gita has no value as authoritative
scripture. A common man with all the four defects of human frailty is
unable to teach that which is worth hearing. The Gita is above such
literature. No mundane book compares with the Bhagavad-gita. When one
accepts Krsna as an ordinary man, the Gita loses all importance. The
Mayavadi argues that the plurality mentioned in this verse is
conventional and that it refers to the body. But previous to this verse
such a bodily conception is already condemned. After condemning the
bodily conception of the living entities, how was it possible for Krsna
to place a conventional proposition on the body again? Therefore,



individuality is maintained on spiritual grounds and is thus confirmed
by great acaryas like Sri Ramanuja and others. It is clearly mentioned
in many places in the Gita that this spiritual individuality is
understood by those who are devotees of the Lord. Those who are envious
of Krsna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead have no bona fide access
to this great literature. The nondevotee's approach to the teachings of
the Gita is something like bees licking on a bottle of honey. One
cannot have a taste of honey unless one opens the bottle. Similarly,
the mysticism of the Bhagavad-gita can be understood only by devotees,
and no one else can taste it, as it is stated in the Fourth Chapter of
the book. Nor can the Gita be touched by persons who envy the very
existence of the Lord. Therefore, the Mayavadi explanation of the Gita
is a most misleading presentation of the whole truth. Lord Caitanya has
forbidden us to read commentations made by the Mayavadis and warns that
one who takes to such an understanding of the Mayavadi philosophy loses
all power to understand the real mystery of the Gita. If individuality
refers to the empirical universe, then there is no need of teaching by
the Lord. The plurality of the individual soul and of the Lord is an
eternal fact, and it is confirmed by the Vedas as above mentioned.

TEXT 13

dehino 'smin yatha dehe
kaumaram yauvanam jara
tatha dehantara-praptir
dhiras tatra na muhyati

SYNONYMS

dehinah--of the embodied; asmin--in this; yatha--as; dehe--in the body;
kaumaram--boyhood; yauvanam--youth; jara--old age; tatha--similarly;
deha-antara--transference of the body; praptih--achievement; dhirah--
the sober; tatra--thereupon; na--never; muhyati--deluded.

TRANSLATION

As the embodied soul continuously passes, in this body, from boyhood to
youth to old age, the soul similarly passes into another body at death.
A self-realized soul is not bewildered by such a change.

PURPORT

Since every living entity is an individual soul, each is changing his
body every moment, manifesting sometimes as a child, sometimes as a
youth, and sometimes as an old man. Yet the same spirit soul is there
and does not undergo any change. This individual soul finally changes
the body at death and transmigrates to another body; and since it is
sure to have another body in the next birth--either material or
spiritual--there was no cause for lamentation by Arjuna on account of
death, neither for Bhisma nor for Drona, for whom he was so much
concerned. Rather, he should rejoice for their changing bodies from old
to new ones, thereby rejuvenating their energy. Such changes of body
account for varieties of enjoyment or suffering, according to one's
work in life. So Bhisma and Drona, being noble souls, were surely going
to have either spiritual bodies in the next life, or at least life in
heavenly bodies for superior enjoyment of material existence. So, in
either case, there was no cause of lamentation.



Any man who has perfect knowledge of the constitution of the individual
soul, the Supersoul and nature--both material and spiritual--is called
a dhira or a most sober man. Such a man is never deluded by the change
of bodies. The Mayavadi theory of oneness of the spirit soul cannot be
entertained on the ground that the spirit soul cannot be cut into
pieces as a fragmental portion. Such cutting into different individual
souls would make the Supreme cleavable or changeable, against the
principle of the Supreme Soul being unchangeable. As confirmed in the
Gita, the fragmental portions of the Supreme exist eternally (sanatana)
and are called ksara; that is, they have a tendency to fall down into
material nature. These fragmental portions are eternally so, and even
after liberation, the individual soul remains the same--fragmental. But
once liberated, he lives an eternal life in bliss and knowledge with
the Personality of Godhead. The theory of reflection can be applied to
the Supersoul, who is present in each and every individual body and is
known as the Paramatma, who is different from the individual living
entity. When the sky is reflected in water, the reflections represent
both the sun and the moon and the stars also. The stars can be compared
to the living entities and the sun or the moon to the Supreme Lord. The
individual fragmental spirit soul is represented by Arjuna, and the
Supreme Soul is the Personality of Godhead Sri Krsna. They are not on
the same level, as it will be apparent in the beginning of the Fourth
Chapter. If Arjuna is on the same level with Krsna, and Krsna is not
superior to Arjuna, then their relationship of instructor and
instructed becomes meaningless. If both of them are deluded by the
illusory energy (maya), then there is no need of one being the
instructor and the other the instructed. Such instruction would be
useless because, in the clutches of maya, no one can be an
authoritative instructor. Under the circumstances, it is admitted that
Lord Krsna is the Supreme Lord, superior in position to the living
entity, Arjuna, who is a forgetful soul deluded by maya.

TEXT 14

matra-sparsas tu kaunteya
sitosna-sukha-duhkha-dah
agamapayino 'nityas
tams titiksasva bharata

SYNONYMS

matra--sensuous; sparsah--perception; tu--only; kaunteya--O son of
Kunti; sita--winter; usna--summer; sukha--happiness; duhkha-dah--giving
pain; agama--appearing; apayinah--disappearing; anityah--nonpermanent;
tan--all of them; titiksasva--just try to tolerate; bharata--O
descendant of the Bharata dynasty.

TRANSLATION

O son of Kunti, the nonpermanent appearance of happiness and distress,
and their disappearance in due course, are like the appearance and
disappearance of winter and summer seasons. They arise from sense
perception, O scion of Bharata, and one must learn to tolerate them
without being disturbed.

PURPORT



In the proper discharge of duty, one has to learn to tolerate
nonpermanent appearances and disappearances of happiness and distress.
According to Vedic injunction, one has to take his bath early in the
morning even during the month of Magha (January-February). It is very
cold at that time, but in spite of that a man who abides by the
religious principles does not hesitate to take his bath. Similarly, a
woman does not hesitate to cook in the kitchen in the months of May and
June, the hottest part of the summer season. One has to execute his
duty in spite of climatic inconveniences. Similarly, to fight is the
religious principle of the ksatriyas, and although one has to fight
with some friend or relative, one should not deviate from his
prescribed duty. One has to follow the prescribed rules and regulations
of religious principles in order to rise up to the platform of
knowledge because by knowledge and devotion only can one liberate
himself from the clutches of maya (illusion).
The two different names of address given to Arjuna are also
significant. To address him as Kaunteya signifies his great blood
relations from his mother's side; and to address him as Bharata
signifies his greatness from his father's side. From both sides he is
supposed to have a great heritage. A great heritage brings
responsibility in the matter of proper discharge of duties; therefore,
he cannot avoid fighting.

TEXT 15

yam hi na vyathayanty ete
purusam purusarsabha
sama-duhkha-sukham dhiram
so 'mrtatvaya kalpate

SYNONYMS

yam--one whom; hi--certainly; na--never; vyathayanti--are distressing;
ete--all these; purusam--to a person; purusa-rsabha--O best among men;
sama--unaltered; duhkha--distressed; sukham--happiness; dhiram--
patient; sah--he; amrtatvaya--for liberation; kalpate--is considered
eligible.

TRANSLATION

O best among men [Arjuna], the person who is not disturbed by happiness
and distress and is steady in both is certainly eligible for
liberation.

PURPORT

Anyone who is steady in his determination for the advanced stage of
spiritual realization and can equally tolerate the onslaughts of
distress and happiness is certainly a person eligible for liberation.
In the varnasrama institution, the fourth stage of life, namely the
renounced order (sannyasa), is a painstaking situation. But one who is
serious about making his life perfect surely adopts the sannyasa order
of life in spite of all difficulties. The difficulties usually arise
from having to sever family relationships, to give up the connection of
wife and children. But if anyone is able to tolerate such difficulties,
surely his path to spiritual realization is complete. Similarly, in
Arjuna's discharge of duties as a ksatriya, he is advised to persevere,
even if it is difficult to fight with his family members or similarly



beloved persons. Lord Caitanya took sannyasa at the age of twenty-four,
and His dependents, young wife as well as old mother, had no one else
to look after them. Yet for a higher cause He took sannyasa and was
steady in the discharge of higher duties. That is the way of achieving
liberation from material bondage.

TEXT 16

nasato vidyate bhavo
nabhavo vidyate satah
ubhayor api drsto 'ntas
tv anayos tattva-darsibhih

SYNONYMS

na--never; asatah--of the nonexistent; vidyate--there is; bhavah--
endurance; na--never; abhavah--changing quality; vidyate--there is;
satah--of the eternal; ubhayoh--of the two; api--verily; drstah--
observed; antah--conclusion; tu--but; anayoh--of them; tattva--truth;
darsibhih--by the seers.

TRANSLATION

Those who are seers of the truth have concluded that of the nonexistent
there is no endurance, and of the existent there is no cessation. This
seers have concluded by studying the nature of both.

PURPORT

There is no endurance of the changing body. That the body is changing
every moment by the actions and reactions of the different cells is
admitted by modern medical science; and thus growth and old age are
taking place in the body. But the spirit soul exists permanently,
remaining the same despite all changes of the body and the mind. That
is the difference between matter and spirit. By nature, the body is
ever changing, and the soul is eternal. This conclusion is established
by all classes of seers of the truth, both impersonalist and
personalist. In the Visnu Purana (2.12.38) it is stated that Visnu and
His abodes all have self-illuminated spiritual existence (jyotimsi
visnur bhuvanani visnuh). The words existent and nonexistent refer only
to spirit and matter. That is the version of all seers of truth.
This is the beginning of the instruction by the Lord to the living
entities who are bewildered by the influence of ignorance. Removal of
ignorance involves the reestablishment of the eternal relationship
between the worshiper and the worshipable and the consequent
understanding of the difference between the part and parcel living
entities and the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One can understand the
nature of the Supreme by thorough study of oneself, the difference
between oneself and the Supreme being understood as the relationship
between the part and the whole. In the Vedanta-sutras, as well as in
the Srimad-Bhagavatam, the Supreme has been accepted as the origin of
all emanations. Such emanations are experienced by superior and
inferior natural sequences. The living entities belong to the superior
nature, as it will be revealed in the Seventh Chapter. Although there
is no difference between the energy and the energetic, the energetic is
accepted as the Supreme, and energy or nature is accepted as the
subordinate. The living entities, therefore, are always subordinate to
the Supreme Lord, as in the case of the master and the servant, or the



teacher and the taught. Such clear knowledge is impossible to
understand under the spell of ignorance, and to drive away such
ignorance the Lord teaches the Bhagavad-gita for the enlightenment of
all living entities for all time.

TEXT 17

avinasi tu tad viddhi
yena sarvam idam tatam
vinasam avyayasyasya
na kascit kartum arhati

SYNONYMS

avinasi--imperishable; tu--but; tat--that; viddhi--know it; yena--by
whom; sarvam--all of the body; idam--this; tatam--pervaded; vinasam--
destruction; avyayasya--of the imperishable; asya--of it; na kascit--no
one; kartum--to do; arhati--is able.

TRANSLATION

Know that which pervades the entire body is indestructible. No one is
able to destroy the imperishable soul.

PURPORT

This verse more clearly explains the real nature of the soul, which is
spread all over the body. Anyone can understand what is spread all over
the body: it is consciousness. Everyone is conscious of the pains and
pleasures of the body in part or as a whole. This spreading of
consciousness is limited within one's own body. The pains and pleasures
of one body are unknown to another. Therefore, each and every body is
the embodiment of an individual soul, and the symptom of the soul's
presence is perceived as individual consciousness. This soul is
described as one ten-thousandth part of the upper portion of the hair
point in size. The Svetasvatara Upanisad (5.9) confirms this:

balagra-sata-bhagasya
satadha kalpitasya ca
bhago jivah vijneyah
sa canantyaya kalpate

"When the upper point of a hair is divided into one hundred parts and
again each of such parts is further divided into one hundred parts,
each such part is the measurement of the dimension of the spirit soul."
Similarly the same version is stated:

kesagra-sata-bhagasya
satamsah sadrsatmakah
jivah suksma-svarupo 'yam
sankhyatito hi cit-kanah

"There are innumerable particles of spiritual atoms, which are measured
as one ten-thousandth of the upper portion of the hair."
Therefore, the individual particle of spirit soul is a spiritual atom
smaller than the material atoms, and such atoms are innumerable. This
very small spiritual spark is the basic principle of the material body,
and the influence of such a spiritual spark is spread all over the body



as the influence of the active principle of some medicine spreads
throughout the body. This current of the spirit soul is felt all over
the body as consciousness, and that is the proof of the presence of the
soul. Any layman can understand that the material body minus
consciousness is a dead body, and this consciousness cannot be revived
in the body by any means of material administration. Therefore,
consciousness is not due to any amount of material combination, but to
the spirit soul. In the Mundaka Upanisad (3.1.9) the measurement of the
atomic spirit soul is further explained:

eso 'nur atma cetasa veditavyo
yasmin pranah pancadha samvivesa
pranais cittam sarvam otam prajanam
yasmin visuddhe vibhavaty esa atma

"The soul is atomic in size and can be perceived by perfect
intelligence. This atomic soul is floating in the five kinds of air
[prana, apana, vyana, samana and udana], is situated within the heart,
and spreads its influence all over the body of the embodied living
entities. When the soul is purified from the contamination of the five
kinds of material air, its spiritual influence is exhibited."
The hatha-yoga system is meant for controlling the five kinds of air
encircling the pure soul by different kinds of sitting postures--not
for any material profit, but for liberation of the minute soul from the
entanglement of the material atmosphere.
So the constitution of the atomic soul is admitted in all Vedic
literatures, and it is also actually felt in the practical experience
of any sane man. Only the insane man can think of this atomic soul as
all-pervading visnu-tattva.
The influence of the atomic soul can be spread all over a particular
body. According to the Mundaka Upanisad, this atomic soul is situated
in the heart of every living entity, and because the measurement of the
atomic soul is beyond the power of appreciation of the material
scientists, some of them assert foolishly that there is no soul. The
individual atomic soul is definitely there in the heart along with the
Supersoul, and thus all the energies of bodily movement are emanating
from this part of the body. The corpuscles which carry the oxygen from
the lungs gather energy from the soul. When the soul passes away from
this position, activity of the blood, generating fusion, ceases.
Medical science accepts the importance of the red corpuscles, but it
cannot ascertain that the source of the energy is the soul. Medical
science, however, does admit that the heart is the seat of all energies
of the body.
Such atomic particles of the spirit whole are compared to the sunshine
molecules. In the sunshine there are innumerable radiant molecules.
Similarly, the fragmental parts of the Supreme Lord are atomic sparks
of the rays of the Supreme Lord, called by the name prabha, or superior
energy. Neither Vedic knowledge nor modern science denies the existence
of the spirit soul in the body, and the science of the soul is
explicitly described in the Bhagavad-gita by the Personality of Godhead
Himself.

TEXT 18

antavanta ime deha
nityasyoktah saririnah
anasino 'prameyasya
tasmad yudhyasva bharata



SYNONYMS

anta-vantah--perishable; ime--all these; dehah--material bodies;
nityasya--eternal in existence; uktah--it is so said; saririnah--the
embodied soul; anasinah--never to be destroyed; aprameyasya--
immeasurable; tasmat--therefore; yudhyasva--fight; bharata--O
descendant of Bharata.

TRANSLATION

Only the material body of the indestructible, immeasurable and eternal
living entity is subject to destruction; therefore, fight, O descendant
of Bharata.

PURPORT

The material body is perishable by nature. It may perish immediately,
or it may do so after a hundred years. It is a question of time only.
There is no chance of maintaining it indefinitely. But the spirit soul
is so minute that it cannot even be seen by an enemy, to say nothing of
being killed. As mentioned in the previous verse, it is so small that
no one can have any idea how to measure its dimension. So from both
viewpoints there is no cause of lamentation because the living entity
can neither be killed as he is, nor can the material body, which cannot
be saved for any length of time, be permanently protected. The minute
particle of the whole spirit acquires this material body according to
his work, and therefore observance of religious principles should be
utilized. In the Vedanta-sutras the living entity is qualified as light
because he is part and parcel of the supreme light. As sunlight
maintains the entire universe, so the light of the soul maintains this
material body. As soon as the spirit soul is out of this material body,
the body begins to decompose; therefore it is the spirit soul which
maintains this body. The body itself is unimportant. Arjuna was advised
to fight and sacrifice the material body for the cause of religion.

TEXT 19

ya enam vetti hantaram
yas cainam manyate hatam
ubhau tau na vijanito
nayam hanti na hanyate

SYNONYMS

yah--anyone; enam--this; vetti--knows; hantaram--the killer; yah--
anyone; ca--also; enam--this; manyate--thinks; hatam--killed; ubhau--
both of them; tau--they; na--never; vijanitah--in knowledge; na--never;
ayam--this; hanti--kills; na--nor; hanyate--be killed.

TRANSLATION

He who thinks that the living entity is the slayer or that he is slain,
does not understand. One who is in knowledge knows that the self slays
not nor is slain.

PURPORT



When an embodied living entity is hurt by fatal weapons, it is to be
known that the living entity within the body is not killed. The spirit
soul is so small that it is impossible to kill him by any material
weapon, as is evident from the previous verses. Nor is the living
entity killable, because of his spiritual constitution. What is killed,
or is supposed to be killed, is the body only. This, however, does not
at all encourage killing of the body. The Vedic injunction is ma
himsyat sarva bhutani: never commit violence to anyone. Nor does
understanding that the living entity is not killed encourage animal
slaughter. Killing the body of anyone without authority is abominable
and is punishable by the law of the state as well as by the law of the
Lord. Arjuna, however, is being engaged in killing for the principle of
religion, and not whimsically.

TEXT 20

na jayate mriyate va kadacin
nayam bhutva bhavita va na bhuyah
ajo nityah sasvato 'yam purano
na hanyate hanyamane sarire

SYNONYMS

na--never; jayate--takes birth; mriyate--never dies; va--either;
kadacit--at any time (past, present or future); na--never; ayam--this;
bhutva--came into being; bhavita--will come to be; va--or; na--not;
bhuyah--or has coming to be; ajah--unborn; nityah--eternal; sasvatah--
permanent; ayam--this; puranah--the oldest; na--never; hanyate--is
killed; hanyamane--being killed; sarire--by the body.

TRANSLATION

For the soul there is never birth nor death. Nor, having once been,
does He ever cease to be. He is unborn, eternal, ever-existing, undying
and primeval. He is not slain when the body is slain.

PURPORT

Qualitatively, the small atomic fragmental part of the Supreme Spirit
is one with the Supreme. He undergoes no changes like the body.
Sometimes the soul is called the steady, or kutastha. The body is
subject to six kinds of transformations. It takes its birth from the
womb of the mother's body, remains for some time, grows, produces some
effects, gradually dwindles, and at last vanishes into oblivion. The
soul, however, does not go through such changes. The soul is not born,
but, because he takes on a material body, the body takes its birth. The
soul does not take birth there, and the soul does not die. Anything
which has birth also has death. And because the soul has no birth, he
therefore has no past, present or future. He is eternal, ever-existing,
and primeval--that is, there is no trace in history of his coming into
being. Under the impression of the body, we seek the history of birth,
etc., of the soul. The soul does not at any time become old, as the
body does. The so-called old man, therefore, feels himself to be in the
same spirit as in his childhood or youth. The changes of the body do
not affect the soul. The soul does not deteriorate like a tree, nor
anything material. The soul has no by-product either. The by-products
of the body, namely children, are also different individual souls; and,
owing to the body, they appear as children of a particular man. The



body develops because of the soul's presence, but the soul has neither
offshoots nor change. Therefore, the soul is free from the six changes
of the body.
In the Katha Upanisad (1.2.18) also we find a similar passage which
reads:

na jayate mriyate va vipascin
nayam kutascin na babhuva kascit
ajo nityah sasvato 'yam purano
na hanyate hanyamane sarire

The meaning and purport of this verse is the same as in the Bhagavad-
gita, but here in this verse there is one special word, vipascit, which
means learned or with knowledge.
The soul is full of knowledge, or full always with consciousness.
Therefore, consciousness is the symptom of the soul. Even if one does
not find the soul within the heart, where he is situated, one can still
understand the presence of the soul simply by the presence of
consciousness. Sometimes we do not find the sun in the sky owing to
clouds, or for some other reason, but the light of the sun is always
there, and we are convinced that it is therefore daytime. As soon as
there is a little light in the sky early in the morning, we can
understand that the sun is in the sky. Similarly, since there is some
consciousness in all bodies--whether man or animal--we can understand
the presence of the soul. This consciousness of the soul is, however,
different from the consciousness of the Supreme because the supreme
consciousness is all-knowledge--past, present and future. The
consciousness of the individual soul is prone to be forgetful. When he
is forgetful of his real nature, he obtains education and enlightenment
from the superior lessons of Krsna. But Krsna is not like the forgetful
soul. If so, Krsna's teachings of Bhagavad-gita would be useless.
There are two kinds of souls--namely the minute particle soul (anu-
atma) and the Supersoul (vibhu-atma). This is also confirmed in the
Katha Upanisad (1.2.20) in this way:

anor aniyan mahato mahiyan
atmasya jantor nihito guhayam
tam akratuh pasyati vita-soko
dhatuh prasadan mahimanam atmanah

"Both the Supersoul [Paramatma] and the atomic soul [jivatma] are
situated on the same tree of the body within the same heart of the
living being, and only one who has become free from all material
desires as well as lamentations can, by the grace of the Supreme,
understand the glories of the soul." Krsna is the fountainhead of the
Supersoul also, as it will be disclosed in the following chapters, and
Arjuna is the atomic soul, forgetful of his real nature; therefore he
requires to be enlightened by Krsna, or by His bona fide representative
(the spiritual master).

TEXT 21

vedavinasinam nityam
ya enam ajam avyayam
katham sa purusah partha
kam ghatayati hanti kam

SYNONYMS



veda--in knowledge; avinasinam--indestructible; nityam--always; yah--
one who; enam--this (soul); ajam--unborn; avyayam--immutable; katham--
how; sah--he; purusah--person; partha--O Partha (Arjuna); kam--whom;
ghatayati--hurts; hanti--kills; kam--whom.

TRANSLATION

O Partha, how can a person who knows that the soul is indestructible,
unborn, eternal and immutable, kill anyone or cause anyone to kill?

PURPORT

Everything has its proper utility, and a man who is situated in
complete knowledge knows how and where to apply a thing for its proper
utility. Similarly, violence also has its utility, and how to apply
violence rests with the person in knowledge. Although the justice of
the peace awards capital punishment to a person condemned for murder,
the justice of the peace cannot be blamed because he orders violence to
another person according to the codes of justice. In Manu-samhita, the
lawbook for mankind, it is supported that a murderer should be
condemned to death so that in his next life he will not have to suffer
for the great sin he has committed. Therefore, the king's punishment of
hanging a murderer is actually beneficial. Similarly, when Krsna orders
fighting, it must be concluded that violence is for supreme justice,
and, as such, Arjuna should follow the instruction, knowing well that
such violence, committed in the act of fighting for Krsna, is not
violence at all because, at any rate, the man, or rather the soul,
cannot be killed; so for the administration of justice, so-called
violence is permitted. A surgical operation is not meant to kill the
patient, but to cure him. Therefore the fighting to be executed by
Arjuna at the instruction of Krsna is with full knowledge, so there is
no possibility of sinful reaction.

TEXT 22

vasamsi jirnani yatha vihaya
navani grhnati naro 'parani
tatha sarirani vihaya jirnany
anyani samyati navani dehi

SYNONYMS

vasamsi--garments; jirnani--old and worn out; yatha--as it is; vihaya--
giving up; navani--new garments; grhnati--does accept; narah--a man;
aparani--other; tatha--in the same way; sarirani--bodies; vihaya--
giving up; jirnani--old and useless; anyani--different; samyati--verily
accepts; navani--new sets; dehi--the embodied.

TRANSLATION

As a person puts on new garments, giving up old ones, similarly, the
soul accepts new material bodies, giving up the old and useless ones.

PURPORT

Change of body by the atomic individual soul is an accepted fact. Even
some of the modern scientists who do not believe in the existence of



the soul, but at the same time cannot explain the source of energy from
the heart, have to accept continuous changes of body which appear from
childhood to boyhood and from boyhood to youth and again from youth to
old age. From old age, the change is transferred to another body. This
has already been explained in a previous verse.
Transference of the atomic individual soul to another body is made
possible by the grace of the Supersoul. The Supersoul fulfills the
desire of the atomic soul as one friend fulfills the desire of another.
The Vedas, like the Mundaka Upanisad, as well as the Svetasvatara
Upanisad, compare the soul and the Supersoul to two friendly birds
sitting on the same tree. One of the birds (the individual atomic soul)
is eating the fruit of the tree, and the other bird (Krsna) is simply
watching His friend. Of these two birds--although they are the same in
quality--one is captivated by the fruits of the material tree, while
the other is simply witnessing the activities of His friend. Krsna is
the witnessing bird, and Arjuna is the eating bird. Although they are
friends, one is still the master and the other is the servant.
Forgetfulness of this relationship by the atomic soul is the cause of
one's changing his position from one tree to another or from one body
to another. The jiva soul is struggling very hard on the tree of the
material body, but as soon as he agrees to accept the other bird as the
supreme spiritual master--as Arjuna agreed to do by voluntary surrender
unto Krsna for instruction--the subordinate bird immediately becomes
free from all lamentations. Both the Mundaka Upanisad (3.1.2) and
Svetasvatara Upanisad (4.7) confirm this:

samane vrkse puruso nimagno
'nisaya socati muhyamanah
justam yada pasyaty anyam isam
asya mahimanam iti vita-sokah

"Although the two birds are in the same tree, the eating bird is fully
engrossed with anxiety and moroseness as the enjoyer of the fruits of
the tree. But if in some way or other he turns his face to his friend
who is the Lord and knows His glories--at once the suffering bird
becomes free from all anxieties." Arjuna has now turned his face
towards his eternal friend, Krsna, and is understanding the Bhagavad-
gita from Him. And thus, hearing from Krsna, he can understand the
supreme glories of the Lord and be free from lamentation.
Arjuna is advised herewith by the Lord not to lament for the bodily
change of his old grandfather and his teacher. He should rather be
happy to kill their bodies in the righteous fight so that they may be
cleansed at once of all reactions from various bodily activities. One
who lays down his life on the sacrificial altar, or in the proper
battlefield, is at once cleansed of bodily reactions and promoted to a
higher status of life. So there was no cause for Arjuna's lamentation.

TEXT 23

nainam chindanti sastrani
nainam dahati pavakah
na cainam kledayanty apo
na sosayati marutah

SYNONYMS

na--never; enam--this soul; chindanti--can cut to pieces; sastrani--all
weapons; na--never; enam--unto this soul; dahati--burns; pavakah--fire;



na--never; ca--also; enam--unto this soul; kledayanti--moistens; apah--
water; na--never; sosayati--dries; marutah--wind.

TRANSLATION

The soul can never be cut to pieces by any weapon, nor burned by fire,
nor moistened by water, nor withered by the wind.

PURPORT

All kinds of weapons, swords, flames, rains, tornadoes, etc.--are
unable to kill the spirit soul. It appears that there were many kinds
of weapons made of earth, water, air, ether, etc., in addition to the
modern weapons of fire. Even the nuclear weapons of the modern age are
classified as fire weapons, but formerly there were other weapons made
of all different kinds of material elements. Firearms were counteracted
by water weapons, which are now unknown to modern science. Nor do
modern scientists have knowledge of tornado weapons. Nonetheless, the
soul can never be cut into pieces, nor annihilated by any number of
weapons, regardless of scientific devices.
Nor was it ever possible to cut the individual souls from the original
Soul. The Mayavadi, however, cannot describe how the individual soul
evolved from ignorance and consequently became covered by illusory
energy. Because they are atomic individual souls (sanatana) eternally,
they are prone to be covered by the illusory energy, and thus they
become separated from the association of the Supreme Lord, just as the
sparks of the fire, although one in quality with the fire, are prone to
be extinguished when out of the fire. In the Varaha Purana, the living
entities are described as separated parts and parcels of the Supreme.
They are eternally so, according to the Bhagavad-gita also. So, even
after being liberated from illusion, the living entity remains a
separate identity, as is evident from the teachings of the Lord to
Arjuna. Arjuna became liberated by the knowledge received from Krsna,
but he never became one with Krsna.

TEXT 24

acchedyo 'yam adahyo 'yam
akledyo 'sosya eva ca
nityah sarva-gatah sthanur
acalo 'yam sanatanah

SYNONYMS

acchedyah--unbreakable; ayam--this soul; adahyah--cannot be burned;
ayam--this soul; akledyah--insoluble; asosyah--cannot be dried; eva--
certainly; ca--and; nityah--everlasting; sarva-gatah--all-pervading;
sthanuh--unchangeable; acalah--immovable; ayam--this soul; sanatanah--
eternally the same.

TRANSLATION

This individual soul is unbreakable and insoluble, and can be neither
burned nor dried. He is everlasting, all-pervading, unchangeable,
immovable and eternally the same.

PURPORT



All these qualifications of the atomic soul definitely prove that the
individual soul is eternally the atomic particle of the spirit whole,
and he remains the same atom eternally, without change. The theory of
monism is very difficult to apply in this case, because the individual
soul is never expected to become one homogeneously. After liberation
from material contamination, the atomic soul may prefer to remain as a
spiritual spark in the effulgent rays of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, but the intelligent souls enter into the spiritual planets to
associate with the Personality of Godhead.
The word sarva-gata ("all-pervading") is significant because there is
no doubt that living entities are all over God's creation. They live on
the land, in the water, in the air, within the earth and even within
fire. The belief that they are sterilized in fire is not acceptable,
because it is clearly stated here that the soul cannot be burned by
fire. Therefore, there is no doubt that there are living entities also
in the sun planet with suitable bodies to live there. If the sun globe
is uninhabited, then the word sarva-gata--"living everywhere"--becomes
meaningless.

TEXT 25

avyakto 'yam acintyo 'yam
avikaryo 'yam ucyate
tasmad evam viditvainam
nanusocitum arhasi

SYNONYMS

avyaktah--invisible; ayam--this soul; acintyah--inconceivable; ayam--
this soul; avikaryah--unchangeable; ayam--this soul; ucyate--is said;
tasmat--therefore; evam--like this; viditva--knowing it well; enam--
this soul; na--do not; anusocitum--may lament over; arhasi--you
deserve.

TRANSLATION

It is said that the soul is invisible, inconceivable, immutable, and
unchangeable. Knowing this, you should not grieve for the body.

PURPORT

As described previously, the magnitude of the soul is so small for our
material calculation that he cannot be seen even by the most powerful
microscope; therefore, he is invisible. As far as the soul's existence
is concerned, no one can establish his existence experimentally beyond
the proof of sruti, or Vedic wisdom. We have to accept this truth,
because there is no other source of understanding the existence of the
soul, although it is a fact by perception. There are many things we
have to accept solely on grounds of superior authority. No one can deny
the existence of his father, based upon the authority of his mother.
There is no source of understanding the identity of the father except
by the authority of the mother. Similarly, there is no source of
understanding the soul except by studying the Vedas. In other words,
the soul is inconceivable by human experimental knowledge. The soul is
consciousness and conscious--that also is the statement of the Vedas,
and we have to accept that. Unlike the bodily changes, there is no
change in the soul. As eternally unchangeable, the soul remains atomic
in comparison to the infinite Supreme Soul. The Supreme Soul is



infinite, and the atomic soul is infinitesimal. Therefore, the
infinitesimal soul, being unchangeable, can never become equal to the
infinite soul, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This concept is
repeated in the Vedas in different ways just to confirm the stability
of the conception of the soul. Repetition of something is necessary in
order that we understand the matter thoroughly, without error.

TEXT 26

atha cainam nitya-jatam
nityam va manyase mrtam
tathapi tvam maha-baho
nainam socitum arhasi

SYNONYMS

atha--if, however; ca--also; enam--this soul; nitya-jatam--always born;
nityam--forever; va--either; manyase--so think; mrtam--dead; tatha api-
-still; tvam--you; maha-baho--O mighty-armed one; na--never; enam--
about the soul; socitum--to lament; arhasi--deserve.

TRANSLATION

If, however, you think that the soul is perpetually born and always
dies still, you still have no reason to lament, O mighty-armed.

PURPORT

There is always a class of philosophers, almost akin to the Buddhists,
who do not believe in the separate existence of the soul beyond the
body. When Lord Krsna spoke the Bhagavad-gita, it appears that such
philosophers existed, and they were known as the lokayatikas and
vaibhasikas. These philosophers maintained that life symptoms, or soul,
takes place at a certain mature condition of material combination. The
modern material scientist and materialist philosophers also think
similarly. According to them, the body is a combination of physical
elements, and at a certain stage the life symptoms develop by
interaction of the physical body and chemical elements. The science of
anthropology is based on this philosophy. Currently, many pseudo
religions--now becoming fashionable in America--are also adhering to
this philosophy, as well as to the nihilistic nondevotional Buddhist
sects.
Even if Arjuna did not believe in the existence of the soul--as in the
vaibhasika philosophy--there would still have been no cause for
lamentation. No one laments the loss of a certain bulk of chemicals and
stops discharging his prescribed duty. On the other hand, in modern
science and scientific warfare, so many tons of chemicals are wasted
for achieving victory over the enemy. According to the vaibhasika
philosophy, the so-called soul or atma vanishes along with the
deterioration of the body. So, in any case, whether Arjuna accepted the
Vedic conclusion that there is an atomic soul, or whether he did not
believe in the existence of the soul, he had no reason to lament.
According to this theory, since there are so many living entities
generating out of matter every moment, and so many of them are being
vanquished at every moment, there is no need to grieve for such an
incidence. However, since he was not risking rebirth of the soul,
Arjuna had no reason to be afraid of being affected with sinful
reactions due to his killing his grandfather and teacher. But at the



same time, Krsna sarcastically addressed Arjuna as maha-bahu, mighty-
armed, because He, at least, did not accept the theory of the
vaibhasikas, which leaves aside the Vedic wisdom. As a ksatriya, Arjuna
belonged to the Vedic culture, and it behooved him to continue to
follow its principles.

TEXT 27

jatasya hi dhruvo mrtyur
dhruvam janma mrtasya ca
tasmad apariharye 'rthe
na tvam socitum arhasi

SYNONYMS

jatasya--one who has taken his birth; hi--certainly; dhruvah--a fact;
mrtyuh--death; dhruvam--it is also a fact; janma--birth; mrtasya--of
the dead; ca--also; tasmat--therefore; apariharye--for that which is
unavoidable; arthe--in the matter of; na--do not; tvam--you; socitum--
to lament; arhasi--deserve.

TRANSLATION

For one who has taken his birth, death if certain; and for one who is
dead, birth is certain. Therefore, in the unavoidable discharge of your
duty, you should not lament.

PURPORT

One has to take birth according to one's activities of life. And, after
finishing one term of activities, one has to die to take birth for the
next. In this way the cycle of birth and death is revolving, one after
the other without liberation. This cycle of birth and death does not,
however, support unnecessary murder, slaughter and war. But at the same
time, violence and war are inevitable factors in human society for
keeping law and order.
The Battle of Kuruksetra, being the will of the Supreme, was an
inevitable event, and to fight for the right cause is the duty of a
ksatriya. Why should he be afraid of or aggrieved at the death of his
relatives since he was discharging his proper duty? He did not deserve
to break the law, thereby becoming subjected to the reactions of sinful
acts, of which he was so afraid. By avoiding the discharge of his
proper duty, he would not be able to stop the death of his relatives,
and he would be degraded due to his selection of the wrong path of
action.

TEXT 28

avyaktadini bhutani
vyakta-madhyani bharata
avyakta-nidhanany eva
tatra ka paridevana

SYNONYMS

avyakta-adini--in the beginning unmanifested; bhutani--all that are
created; vyakta--manifested; madhyani--in the middle; bharata--O
descendant of Bharata; avyakta--nonmanifested; nidhanani--all that are



vanquished; eva--it is all like that; tatra--therefore; ka--what;
paridevana--lamentation.

TRANSLATION

All created beings are unmanifest in their beginning, manifest in their
interim state, and unmanifest again when they are annihilated. So what
need is there for lamentation?

PURPORT

Accepting that there are two classes of philosophers, one believing in
the existence of the soul and the other not believing in the existence
of the soul, there is no cause for lamentation in either case.
Nonbelievers in the existence of the soul are called atheists by
followers of Vedic wisdom. Yet even if, for argument's sake, we accept
the atheistic theory, there is still no cause for lamentation. Apart
from the separate existence of the soul, the material elements remain
unmanifested before creation. From this subtle state of unmanifestation
comes manifestation, just as from ether, air is generated; from air,
fire is generated; from fire, water is generated; and from water, earth
becomes manifested. From the earth, many varieties of manifestations
take place. Take, for example, a big skyscraper manifested from the
earth. When it is dismantled, the manifestation becomes again
unmanifested and remains as atoms in the ultimate stage. The law of
conservation of energy remains, but in course of time things are
manifested and unmanifested--that is the difference. Then what cause is
there for lamentation either in the stage of manifestation or in
unmanifestation? Somehow or other, even in the unmanifested stage,
things are not lost. Both at the beginning and at the end, all elements
remain unmanifested, and only in the middle are they manifested, and
this does not make any real material difference.
And if we accept the Vedic conclusion as stated in the Bhagavad-gita
(antavanta ime dehah) that these material bodies are perishable in due
course of time (nityasyoktah saririnah) but that the soul is eternal,
then we must remember always that the body is like a dress; therefore
why lament the changing of a dress? The material body has no factual
existence in relation to the eternal soul. It is something like a
dream. In a dream we may think of flying in the sky, or sitting on a
chariot as a king, but when we wake up we can see that we are neither
in the sky nor seated on the chariot. The Vedic wisdom encourages self-
realization on the basis of the nonexistence of the material body.
Therefore, in either case, whether one believes in the existence of the
soul, or one does not believe in the existence of the soul, there is no
cause for lamentation for loss of the body.

TEXT 29

ascarya-vat pasyati kascid enam
ascarya-vad vadati tathaiva canyah
ascarya-vac cainam anyah srnoti
srutvapy enam veda na caiva kascit

SYNONYMS

ascarya-vat--amazing; pasyati--see; kascit--some; enam--this soul;
ascarya-vat--amazing; vadati--speak; tatha--there; eva--certainly; ca--
also; anyah--another; ascarya-vat--similarly amazing; ca--also; enam--



this soul; anyah--others; srnoti--hear; srutva--having heard; api--
even; enam--this soul; veda--do know; na--never; ca--and; eva--
certainly; kascit--anyone.

TRANSLATION

Some look at the soul as amazing, some describe him as amazing, and
some hear of him as amazing, while others, even after hearing about
him, cannot understand him at all.

PURPORT

Since Gitopanisad is largely based on the principles of the Upanisads,
it is not surprising to also find this passage in the Katha Upanisad
(1.2.7):

sravanayapi bahubhir yo na labhyah
srnvanto 'pi bahavo yam na vidyuh
ascaryo vakta kusalo 'sya labdha
ascaryo 'sya jnata kusalanusistah

The fact that the atomic soul is within the body of a gigantic animal,
in the body of a gigantic banyan tree, and also in the microbic germs,
millions and billions of which occupy only an inch of space, is
certainly very amazing. Men with a poor fund of knowledge and men who
are not austere cannot understand the wonders of the individual atomic
spark of spirit, even though it is explained by the greatest authority
of knowledge, who imparted lessons even to Brahma, the first living
being in the universe. Owing to a gross material conception of things,
most men in this age cannot imagine how such a small particle can
become both so great and so small. So men look at the soul proper as
wonderful either by constitution or by description. Illusioned by the
material energy, people are so engrossed in subject matter for sense
gratification that they have very little time to understand the
question of self-understanding, even though it is a fact that without
this self-understanding all activities result in ultimate defeat in the
struggle for existence. Perhaps one has no idea that one must think of
the soul, and thus make a solution of the material miseries.
Some people who are inclined to hear about the soul may be attending
lectures, in good association, but sometimes, owing to ignorance, they
are misguided by acceptance of the Supersoul and the atomic soul as one
without distinction of magnitude. It is very difficult to find a man
who perfectly understands the position of the soul, the Supersoul, the
atomic soul, their respective functions, relationships and all other
major and minor details. And it is still more difficult to find a man
who has actually derived full benefit from knowledge of the soul, and
who is able to describe the position of the soul in different aspects.
But if, somehow or other, one is able to understand the subject matter
of the soul, then one's life is successful. The easiest process for
understanding the subject matter of self, however, is to accept the
statements of the Bhagavad-gita spoken by the greatest authority, Lord
Krsna, without being deviated by other theories. But it also requires a
great deal of penance and sacrifice, either in this life or in the
previous ones, before one is able to accept Krsna as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Krsna can, however, be known as such by the
causeless mercy of the pure devotee and by no other way.

TEXT 30



dehi nityam avadhyo 'yam
dehe sarvasya bharata
tasmat sarvani bhutani
na tvam socitum arhasi

SYNONYMS

dehi--the owner of the material body; nityam--eternally; avadhyah--
cannot be killed; ayam--this soul; dehe--in the body; sarvasya--of
everyone; bharata--O descendant of Bharata; tasmat--therefore; sarvani-
-all; bhutani--living entities (that are born); na--never; tvam--
yourself; socitum--to lament; arhasi--deserve.

TRANSLATION

O descendant of Bharata, he who dwells in the body is eternal and can
never be slain. Therefore you need not grieve for any creature.

PURPORT

The Lord now concludes the chapter of instruction on the immutable
spirit soul. In describing the immortal soul in various ways, Lord
Krsna establishes that the soul is immortal and the body is temporary.
Therefore Arjuna as a ksatriya should not abandon his duty out of fear
that his grandfather and teacher--Bhisma and Drona--will die in the
battle. On the authority of Sri Krsna, one has to believe that there is
a soul different from the material body, not that there is no such
thing as soul, or that living symptoms develop at a certain stage of
material maturity resulting from the interaction of chemicals. Though
the soul is immortal, violence is not encouraged, but at the time of
war it is not discouraged when there is actual need for it. That need
must be justified in terms of the sanction of the Lord, and not
capriciously.

TEXT 31

sva-dharmam api caveksya
na vikampitum arhasi
dharmyad dhi yuddhac chreyo 'nyat
ksatriyasya na vidyate

SYNONYMS

sva-dharmam--one's own religious principles; api--also; ca--indeed;
aveksya--considering; na--never; vikampitum--to hesitate; arhasi--you
deserve; dharmyat--from religious principles; hi--indeed; yuddhat--than
fighting; sreyah--better engagements; anyat--anything else;
ksatriyasya--of the ksatriya; na--does not; vidyate--exist.

TRANSLATION

Considering your specific duty as a ksatriya, you should know that
there is no better engagement for you than fighting on religious
principles; and so there is no need for hesitation.

PURPORT



Out of the four orders of social administration, the second order, for
the matter of good administration, is called ksatriya. Ksat means hurt.
One who gives protection from harm is called ksatriya (trayate--to give
protection). The ksatriyas are trained for killing in the forest. A
ksatriya would go into the forest and challenge a tiger face to face
and fight with the tiger with his sword. When the tiger was killed, it
would be offered the royal order of cremation. This system is being
followed even up to the present day by the ksatriya kings of the Jaipur
state. The ksatriyas are specially trained for challenging and killing
because religious violence is sometimes a necessary factor. Therefore,
ksatriyas are never meant for accepting directly the order of sannyasa
or renunciation. Nonviolence in politics may be a diplomacy, but it is
never a factor or principle. In the religious law books it is stated:

ahavesu mitho 'nyonyam
jighamsanto mahi-ksitah
yuddhamanah param saktya
svargam yanty aparan-mukhah

yajnesu pasavo brahman
hanyante satatam dvijaih
samskrtah kila mantrais ca
te 'pi svargam avapnuvan

"In the battlefield, a king or ksatriya, while fighting another king
envious of him, is eligible for achieving heavenly planets after death,
as the brahmanas also attain the heavenly planets by sacrificing
animals in the sacrificial fire." Therefore, killing on the battlefield
on religious principles and the killing of animals in the sacrificial
fire are not at all considered to be acts of violence, because everyone
is benefited by the religious principles involved. The animal
sacrificed gets a human life immediately without undergoing the gradual
evolutionary process from one form to another, and the ksatriyas killed
in the battlefield also attain the heavenly planets as do the brahmanas
who attain them by offering sacrifice.
There are two kinds of sva-dharmas, specific duties. As long as one is
not liberated, one has to perform the duties of his particular body in
accordance with religious principles in order to achieve liberation.
When one is liberated, one's sva-dharma--specific duty--becomes
spiritual and is not in the material bodily concept. In the bodily
conception of life there are specific duties for the brahmanas and
ksatriyas respectively, and such duties are unavoidable. Sva-dharma is
ordained by the Lord, and this will be clarified in the Fourth Chapter.
On the bodily plane sva-dharma is called varnasrama-dharma, or man's
steppingstone for spiritual understanding. Human civilization begins
from the stage of varnasrama-dharma, or specific duties in terms of the
specific modes of nature of the body obtained. Discharging one's
specific duty in any field of action in accordance with varnasrama-
dharma serves to elevate one to a higher status of life.

TEXT 32

yadrcchaya copapannam
svarga-dvaram apavrtam
sukhinah ksatriyah partha
labhante yuddham idrsam

SYNONYMS



yadrcchaya--by its own accord; ca--also; upapannam--arrived at; svarga-
-heavenly planet; dvaram--door; apavrtam--wide open; sukhinah--very
happy; ksatriyah--the members of the royal order; partha--O son of
Prtha; labhante--do achieve; yuddham--war; idrsam--like this.

TRANSLATION

O Partha, happy are the ksatriyas to whom such fighting opportunities
come unsought, opening for them the doors of the heavenly planets.

PURPORT

As supreme teacher of the world, Lord Krsna condemns the attitude of
Arjuna who said, "I do not find any good in this fighting. It will
cause perpetual habitation in hell." Such statements by Arjuna were due
to ignorance only. He wanted to become nonviolent in the discharge of
his specific duty. For a ksatriya to be in the battlefield and to
become nonviolent is the philosophy of fools. In the Parasara-smrti, or
religious codes made by Parasara, the great sage and father of
Vyasadeva, it is stated:

ksatriyo hi praja raksan
sastra-panih pradandayan
nirjitya para-sainyadi
ksitim dharmena palayet

"The ksatriya's duty is to protect the citizens from all kinds of
difficulties, and for that reason he has to apply violence in suitable
cases for law and order. Therefore he has to conquer the soldiers of
inimical kings, and thus, with religious principles, he should rule
over the world."
Considering all aspects, Arjuna had no reason to refrain from fighting.
If he should conquer his enemies, he would enjoy the kingdom; and if he
should die in the battle, he would be elevated to the heavenly planets
whose doors were wide open to him. Fighting would be for his benefit in
either case.

TEXT 33

atha cet tvam imam dharmyam
sangramam na karisyasi
tatah sva-dharmam kirtim ca
hitva papam avapsyasi

SYNONYMS

atha--therefore; cet--if; tvam--you; imam--this; dharmyam--religious
duty; sangramam--fighting; na--do not; karisyasi--perform; tatah--then;
sva-dharmam--your religious duty; kirtim--reputation; ca--also; hitva--
losing; papam--sinful reaction; avapsyasi--do gain.

TRANSLATION

If, however, you do not fight this religious war, then you will
certainly incur sins for neglecting your duties and thus lose your
reputation as a fighter.



PURPORT

Arjuna was a famous fighter, and he attained fame by fighting many
great demigods, including even Lord Siva. After fighting and defeating
Lord Siva in the dress of a hunter, Arjuna pleased the lord and
received as a reward a weapon called pasupata-astra. Everyone knew that
he was a great warrior. Even Dronacarya gave him benedictions and
awarded him the special weapon by which he could kill even his teacher.
So he was credited with so many military certificates from many
authorities, including his adopted father Indra, the heavenly king. But
if he abandoned the battle, he would not only neglect his specific duty
as a ksatriya, but he would lose all fame and good name and thus
prepare his royal road to hell. In other words, he would go to hell,
not by fighting, but by withdrawing from battle.

TEXT 34

akirtim capi bhutani
kathayisyanti te 'vyayam
sambhavitasya cakirtir
maranad atiricyate

SYNONYMS

akirtim--infamy; ca--also; api--over and above; bhutani--all people;
kathayisyanti--will speak; te--of you; avyayam--forever; sambhavitasya-
-for a respectable man; ca--also; akirtih--ill fame; maranat--than
death; atiricyate--becomes more than.

TRANSLATION

People will always speak of your infamy, and for one who has been
honored, dishonor is worse than death.

PURPORT

Both as a friend and philosopher to Arjuna, Lord Krsna now gives His
final judgment regarding Arjuna's refusal to fight. The Lord says,
"Arjuna, if you leave the battlefield, people will call you a coward
even before your actual fight. And if you think that people may call
you bad names but that you will save your life by fleeing the
battlefield, then My advice is that you'd better die in the battle. For
a respectable man like you, ill fame is worse than death. So, you
should not flee for fear of your life; better die in the battle. That
will save you from the ill fame of misusing My friendship and losing
your prestige in society."
So, the final judgment of the Lord was for Arjuna to die in the battle
and not withdraw.

TEXT 35

bhayad ranad uparatam
mamsyante tvam maha-rathah
yesam ca tvam bahu-mato
bhutva yasyasi laghavam

SYNONYMS



bhayat--out of fear; ranat--from the battlefield; uparatam--ceased;
mamsyante--will consider; tvam--unto you; maha-rathah--the great
generals; yesam--of those who; ca--also; tvam--you; bahu-matah--in
great estimation; bhutva--will become; yasyasi--will go; laghavam--
decreased in value.

TRANSLATION

The great generals who have highly esteemed your name and fame will
think that you have left the battlefield out of fear only, and thus
they will consider you a coward.

PURPORT

Lord Krsna continued to give His verdict to Arjuna: "Do not think that
the great generals like Duryodhana, Karna, and other contemporaries
will think that you have left the battlefield out of compassion for
your brothers and grandfather. They will think that you have left out
of fear for your life. And thus their high estimation of your
personality will go to hell."

TEXT 36

avacya-vadams ca bahun
vadisyanti tavahitah
nindantas tava samarthyam
tato duhkhataram nu kim

SYNONYMS

avacya--unkind; vadan--fabricated words; ca--also; bahun--many;
vadisyanti--will say; tava--your; ahitah--enemies; nindantah--while
vilifying; tava--your; samarthyam--ability; tatah--thereafter; duhkha-
taram--more painful; nu--of course; kim--what is there.

TRANSLATION

Your enemies will describe you in many unkind words and scorn your
ability. What could be more painful for you?

PURPORT

Lord Krsna was astonished in the beginning at Arjuna's uncalled-for
plea for compassion, and He described his compassion as befitting the
non-Aryans. Now in so many words, He has proved His statements against
Arjuna's so-called compassion.

TEXT 37

hato va prapsyasi svargam
jitva va bhoksyase mahim
tasmad uttistha kaunteya
yuddhaya krta-niscayah

SYNONYMS

hatah--being killed; va--either; prapsyasi--you will gain; svargam--the
heavenly kingdom; jitva--by conquering; va--or; bhoksyase--you enjoy;



mahim--the world; tasmat--therefore; uttistha--get up; kaunteya--O son
of Kunti; yuddhaya--to fight; krta--determined; niscayah--uncertainty.

TRANSLATION

O son of Kunti, either you will be killed on the battlefield and attain
the heavenly planets, or you will conquer and enjoy the earthly
kingdom. Therefore get up and fight with determination.

PURPORT

Even though there was no certainty of victory for Arjuna's side, he
still had to fight; for, even being killed there, he could be elevated
into the heavenly planets.

TEXT 38

sukha-duhkhe same krtva
labhalabhau jayajayau
tato yuddhaya yujyasva
naivam papam avapsyasi

SYNONYMS

sukha--happiness; duhkhe--in distress; same--in equanimity; krtva--
doing so; labha-alabhau--both in loss and profit; jaya-ajayau--both in
defeat and victory; tatah--thereafter; yuddhaya--for the sake of
fighting; yujyasva--do fight; na--never; evam--in this way; papam--
sinful reaction; avapsyasi--you will gain.

TRANSLATION

Do thou fight for the sake of fighting, without considering happiness
or distress, loss or gain, victory or defeat--and, by so doing, you
shall never incur sin.

PURPORT

Lord Krsna now directly says that Arjuna should fight for the sake of
fighting because He desires the battle. There is no consideration of
happiness or distress, profit or gain, victory or defeat in the
activities of Krsna consciousness. That everything should be performed
for the sake of Krsna is transcendental consciousness; so there is no
reaction to material activities. He who acts for his own sense
gratification, either in goodness or in passion, is subject to the
reaction, good or bad. But he who has completely surrendered himself in
the activities of Krsna consciousness is no longer obliged to anyone,
nor is he a debtor to anyone, as one is in the ordinary course of
activities. It is said:

devarsi-bhutapta-nrnam pitrnam
na kinkaro nayam rni ca rajan
sarvatmana yah saranam saranyam
gato mukundam parihrtya kartam

"Anyone who has completely surrendered unto Krsna, Mukunda, giving up
all other duties, is no longer a debtor, nor is he obliged to anyone--
not the demigods, nor the sages, nor the people in general, nor



kinsmen, nor humanity, nor forefathers." (Bhag. 11.5.41) That is the
indirect hint given by Krsna to Arjuna in this verse, and the matter
will be more clearly explained in the following verses.

TEXT 39

esa te 'bhihita sankhye
buddhir yoge tv imam srnu
buddhya yukto yaya partha
karma-bandham prahasyasi

SYNONYMS

esa--all these; te--unto you; abhihita--described; sankhye--by
analytical study; buddhih--intelligence; yoge--work without fruitive
result; tu--but; imam--this; srnu--just hear; buddhya--by intelligence;
yuktah--dovetailed; yaya--by which; partha--O son of Prtha; karma-
bandham--bondage of reaction; prahasyasi--you can be released from.

TRANSLATION

Thus far I have declared to you the analytical knowledge of sankhya
philosophy. Now listen to the knowledge of yoga whereby one works
without fruitive result. O son of Prtha, when you act by such
intelligence, you can free yourself from the bondage of works.

PURPORT

According to the Nirukti, or the Vedic dictionary, sankhya means that
which describes phenomena in detail, and sankhya refers to that
philosophy which describes the real nature of the soul. And yoga
involves controlling the senses. Arjuna's proposal not to fight was
based on sense gratification. Forgetting his prime duty, he wanted to
cease fighting because he thought by not killing his relatives and
kinsmen he would be happier than by enjoying the kingdom by conquering
his cousins and brothers, the sons of Dhrtarastra. In both ways, the
basic principles were for sense gratification. Happiness derived from
conquering them and happiness derived by seeing kinsmen alive are both
on the basis of personal sense gratification, for there is a sacrifice
of wisdom and duty. Krsna, therefore, wanted to explain to Arjuna that
by killing the body of his grandfather he would not be killing the soul
proper, and He explained that all individual persons, including the
Lord Himself, are eternal individuals; they were individuals in the
past, they are individuals in the present, and they will continue to
remain individuals in the future, because all of us are individual
souls eternally, and we simply change our bodily dress in different
manners. But, actually, we keep our individuality even after liberation
from the bondage of material dress. An analytical study of the soul and
the body has been very graphically explained by Lord Krsna. And this
descriptive knowledge of the soul and the body from different angles of
vision has been described here as Sankhya, in terms of the Nirukti
dictionary. This Sankhya has nothing to do with the Sankhya philosophy
of the atheist Kapila. Long before the imposter Kapila's Sankhya, the
Sankhya philosophy was expounded in the Srimad-Bhagavatam by the true
Lord Kapila, the incarnation of Lord Krsna, who explained it to His
mother, Devahuti. It is clearly explained by Him that the purusa, or
the Supreme Lord, is active and that He creates by looking over the
prakrti. This is accepted in the Vedas and in the Gita. The description



in the Vedas indicates that the Lord glanced over the prakrti, or
nature, and impregnated it with atomic individual souls. All these
individuals are working in the material world for sense gratification,
and under the spell of material energy they are thinking of being
enjoyers. This mentality is dragged to the last point of liberation
when the living entity wants to become one with the Lord. This is the
last snare of maya or sense gratificatory illusion, and it is only
after many, many births of such sense gratificatory activities that a
great soul surrenders unto Vasudeva, Lord Krsna, thereby fulfilling the
search after the ultimate truth.
Arjuna has already accepted Krsna as his spiritual master by
surrendering himself unto Him: sisyas te 'ham sadhi mam tvam prapannam.
Consequently, Krsna will now tell him about the working process in
buddhi-yoga, or karma-yoga, or in other words, the practice of
devotional service only for the sense gratification of the Lord. This
buddhi-yoga is clearly explained in Chapter Ten, verse ten, as being
direct communion with the Lord, who is sitting as Paramatma in
everyone's heart. But such communion does not take place without
devotional service. One who is therefore situated in devotional or
transcendental loving service to the Lord, or, in other words, in Krsna
consciousness, attains to this stage of buddhi-yoga by the special
grace of the Lord. The Lord says, therefore, that only to those who are
always engaged in devotional service out of transcendental love does He
award the pure knowledge of devotion in love. In that way the devotee
can reach Him easily in the ever-blissful kingdom of God.
Thus the buddhi-yoga mentioned in this verse is the devotional service
of the Lord, and the word Sankhya mentioned herein has nothing to do
with the atheistic sankhya-yoga enunciated by the imposter Kapila. One
should not, therefore, misunderstand that the sankhya-yoga mentioned
herein has any connection with the atheistic Sankhya. Nor did that
philosophy have any influence during that time; nor would Lord Krsna
care to mention such godless philosophical speculations. Real Sankhya
philosophy is described by Lord Kapila in the Srimad-Bhagavatam, but
even that Sankhya has nothing to do with the current topics. Here,
Sankhya means analytical description of the body and the soul. Lord
Krsna made an analytical description of the soul just to bring Arjuna
to the point of buddhi-yoga, or bhakti-yoga. Therefore, Lord Krsna's
Sankhya and Lord Kapila's Sankhya, as described in the Bhagavatam, are
one and the same. They are all bhakti-yoga. He said, therefore, that
only the less intelligent class of men make a distinction between
sankhya-yoga and bhakti-yoga.
Of course, atheistic sankhya-yoga has nothing to do with bhakti-yoga,
yet the unintelligent claim that the atheistic sankhya-yoga is referred
to in the Bhagavad-gita.
One should therefore understand that buddhi-yoga means to work in Krsna
consciousness, in the full bliss and knowledge of devotional service.
One who works for the satisfaction of the Lord only, however difficult
such work may be, is working under the principles of buddhi-yoga and
finds himself always in transcendental bliss. By such transcendental
engagement, one achieves all transcendental qualities automatically, by
the grace of the Lord, and thus his liberation is complete in itself,
without his making extraneous endeavors to acquire knowledge. There is
much difference between work in Krsna consciousness and work for
fruitive results, especially in the matter of sense gratification for
achieving results in terms of family or material happiness. Buddhi-yoga
is therefore the transcendental quality of the work that we perform.

TEXT 40



nehabhikrama-naso 'sti
pratyavayo na vidyate
sv-alpam apy asya dharmasya
trayate mahato bhayat

SYNONYMS

na--there is not; iha--in this world; abhikrama--endeavoring; nasah--
loss; asti--there is; pratyavayah--diminution; na--never; vidyate--
there is; su-alpam--a little; api--although; asya--of this; dharmasya--
of this occupation; trayate--releases; mahatah--of very great; bhayat--
danger.

TRANSLATION

In this endeavor there is no loss or diminution, and a little
advancement on this path can protect one from the most dangerous type
of fear.

PURPORT

Activity in Krsna consciousness, or acting for the benefit of Krsna
without expectation of sense gratification, is the highest
transcendental quality of work. Even a small beginning of such activity
finds no impediment, nor can that small beginning be lost at any stage.
Any work begun on the material plane has to be completed, otherwise the
whole attempt becomes a failure. But any work begun in Krsna
consciousness has a permanent effect, even though not finished. The
performer of such work is therefore not at a loss even if his work in
Krsna consciousness is incomplete. One percent done in Krsna
consciousness bears permanent results, so that the next beginning is
from the point of two percent; whereas, in material activity, without a
hundred percent success, there is no profit. Ajamila performed his duty
in some percentage of Krsna consciousness, but the result he enjoyed at
the end was a hundred percent, by the grace of the Lord. There is a
nice verse in this connection in Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.5.17):

tyaktva sva-dharmam caranambujam harer
bhajann apakvo 'tha patet tato yadi
yatra kva vabhadram abhud amusya kim
ko vartha apto 'bhajatam sva-dharmatah

"If someone gives up self-gratificatory pursuits and works in Krsna
consciousness and then falls down on account of not completing his
work, what loss is there on his part? And, what can one gain if one
performs his material activities perfectly?" Or, as the Christians say,
"What profiteth a man if he gain the whole world yet suffers the loss
of his eternal soul?"
Material activities and their results end with the body. But work in
Krsna consciousness carries a person again to Krsna consciousness, even
after the loss of the body. At least one is sure to have a chance in
the next life of being born again as a human being, either in the
family of a great cultured brahmana or in a rich aristocratic family
that will give one a further chance for elevation. That is the unique
quality of work done in Krsna consciousness.

TEXT 41



vyavasayatmika buddhir
ekeha kuru-nandana
bahu-sakha hy anantas ca
buddhayo 'vyavasayinam

SYNONYMS

vyavasaya-atmika--resolute Krsna consciousness; buddhih--intelligence;
eka--only one; iha--in this world; kuru-nandana--O beloved child of the
Kurus; bahu-sakhah--various branches; hi--indeed; anantah--unlimited;
ca--also; buddhayah--intelligence; avyavasayinam--of those who are not
in Krsna consciousness.

TRANSLATION

Those who are on this path are resolute in purpose, and their aim is
one. O beloved child of the Kurus, the intelligence of those who are
irresolute is many-branched.

PURPORT

A strong faith in Krsna consciousness that one shall be elevated to the
highest perfection of life is called vyavasayatmika intelligence. The
Caitanya-caritamrta (Madhya 22.62) states:

'sraddha'-sabde----visvasa kahe sudrdha niscaya
krsne bhakti kaile sarva-karma krta haya

Faith means unflinching trust in something sublime. When one is engaged
in the duties of Krsna consciousness, he need not act in relationship
to the material world with obligations to family traditions, humanity,
or nationality. Fruitive activities are the engagements of one's
reactions from past good or bad deeds. When one is awake in Krsna
consciousness, he need no longer endeavor for good results in his
activities. When one is situated in Krsna consciousness, all activities
are on the absolute plane, for they are no longer subject to dualities
like good and bad. The highest perfection of Krsna consciousness is
renunciation of the material conception of life. This state is
automatically achieved by progressive Krsna consciousness. The resolute
purpose of a person in Krsna consciousness is based on knowledge,
Vasudevah sarvam iti sa mahatma su-durlabhah, by which one comes to
know perfectly that Vasudeva, or Krsna is the root of all manifested
causes. As water on the root of a tree is automatically distributed to
the leaves and branches, in Krsna consciousness one can render the
highest service to everyone--namely self, family, society, country,
humanity, etc. If Krsna is satisfied by one's actions, then everyone
will be satisfied.
Service in Krsna consciousness is, however, best practiced under the
able guidance of a spiritual master who is a bona fide representative
of Krsna, who knows the nature of the student and who can guide him to
act in Krsna consciousness. As such, to be well-versed in Krsna
consciousness one has to act firmly and obey the representative of
Krsna, and one should accept the instruction of the bona fide spiritual
master as one's mission in life. Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura
instructs us, in his famous prayers for the spiritual master as
follows:



yasya prasadad bhagavat-prasado
yasyaprasadan na gatih kuto 'pi
dhyayan stuvams tasya yasas tri-sandhyam
vande guroh sri-caranaravindam

"By satisfaction of the spiritual master, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead becomes satisfied. And by not satisfying the spiritual master,
there is no chance of being promoted to the plane of Krsna
consciousness. I should, therefore, meditate and pray for his mercy
three times a day, and offer my respectful obeisances unto him, my
spiritual master."
The whole process, however, depends on perfect knowledge of the soul
beyond the conception of the body--not theoretically but practically,
when there is no longer a chance for sense gratification manifested in
fruitive activities. One who is not firmly fixed in mind is diverted by
various types of fruitive acts.

TEXTS 42-43

yam imam puspitam vacam
pravadanty avipascitah
veda-vada-ratah partha
nanyad astiti vadinah

kamatmanah svarga-para
janma-karma-phala-pradam
kriya-visesa-bahulam
bhogaisvarya-gatim prati

SYNONYMS

yam imam--all these; puspitam--flowery; vacam--words; pravadanti--say;
avipascitah--men with a poor fund of knowledge; veda-vada-ratah--
supposed followers of the Vedas; partha--O son of Prtha; na--never;
anyat--anything else; asti--there is; iti--thus; vadinah--advocates;
kama-atmanah--desirous of sense gratification; svarga-parah--aiming to
achieve heavenly planets; janma-karma-phala-pradam--resulting in
fruitive actions, good birth, etc.; kriya-visesa--pompous ceremonies;
bahulam--various; bhoga--sense enjoyment; aisvarya--opulence; gatim--
progress; prati--towards.

TRANSLATION

Men of small knowledge are very much attached to the flowery words of
the Vedas, which recommend various fruitive activities for elevation to
heavenly planets, resultant good birth, power, and so forth. Being
desirous of sense gratification and opulent life, they say that there
is nothing more than this.

PURPORT

People in general are not very intelligent, and due to their ignorance
they are most attached to the fruitive activities recommended in the
karma-kanda portions of the Vedas. They do not want anything more than
sense gratificatory proposals for enjoying life in heaven, where wine
and women are available and material opulence is very common. In the
Vedas many sacrifices are recommended for elevation to the heavenly
planets, especially the jyotistoma sacrifices. In fact, it is stated



that anyone desiring elevation to heavenly planets must perform these
sacrifices, and men with a poor fund of knowledge think that this is
the whole purpose of Vedic wisdom. It is very difficult for such
inexperienced persons to be situated in the determined action of Krsna
consciousness. As fools are attached to the flowers of poisonous trees
without knowing the results of such attractions, similarly
unenlightened men are attracted by such heavenly opulence and the sense
enjoyment thereof.
In the karma-kanda section of the Vedas it is said that those who
perform the four monthly penances become eligible to drink the somarasa
beverages to become immortal and happy forever. Even on this earth some
are very eager to have somarasa to become strong and fit to enjoy sense
gratifications. Such persons have no faith in liberation from material
bondage, and they are very much attached to the pompous ceremonies of
Vedic sacrifices. They are generally sensual, and they do not want
anything other than the heavenly pleasures of life. It is understood
that there are gardens called Nandana-kanana in which there is good
opportunity for association with angelic, beautiful women and having a
profuse supply of somarasa wine. Such bodily happiness is certainly
sensual; therefore there are those who are purely attached to material,
temporary happiness, as lords of the material world.

TEXT 44

bhogaisvarya-prasaktanam
tayapahrta-cetasam
vyavasayatmika buddhih
samadhau na vidhiyate

SYNONYMS

bhoga--material enjoyment; aisvarya--opulence; prasaktanam--those who
are so attached; taya--by such things; apahrta-cetasam--bewildered in
mind; vyavasaya-atmika--fixed determination; buddhih--devotional
service of the Lord; samadhau--in the controlled mind; na--never;
vidhiyate--does take place.

TRANSLATION

In the minds of those who are too attached to sense enjoyment and
material opulence, and who are bewildered by such things, the resolute
determination of devotional service to the Supreme Lord does not take
place.

PURPORT

Samadhi means "fixed mind." The Vedic dictionary, the Nirukti, says,
samyag adhiyate 'sminn atma-tattva-yathatmyam: "When the mind is fixed
for understanding the self, it is called samadhi." Samadhi is never
possible for persons interested in material sense enjoyment, nor for
those who are bewildered by such temporary things. They are more or
less condemned by the process of material energy.

TEXT 45

trai-gunya-visaya veda
nistrai-gunyo bhavarjuna
nirdvandvo nitya-sattva-stho



niryoga-ksema atmavan

SYNONYMS

trai-gunya--pertaining to the three modes of material nature; visayah--
on the subject matter; vedah--Vedic literatures; nistrai-gunyah--in a
pure state of spiritual existence; bhava--be; arjuna--O Arjuna;
nirdvandvah--free from the pains of opposites; nitya-sattva-sthah--ever
remaining in sattva (goodness); niryoga-ksemah--free from (the thought
of) acquisition and preservation; atma-van--established in the self.

TRANSLATION

The Vedas mainly deal with the subject of the three modes of material
nature. Rise above these modes, O Arjuna. Be transcendental to all of
them. Be free from all dualities and from all anxieties for gain and
safety, and be established in the self.

PURPORT

All material activities involve actions and reactions in the three
modes of material nature. They are meant for fruitive results, which
cause bondage in the material world. The Vedas deal mostly with
fruitive activities to gradually elevate the general public from the
field of sense gratification to a position on the transcendental plane.
Arjuna, as a student and friend of Lord Krsna, is advised to raise
himself to the transcendental position of Vedanta philosophy where, in
the beginning, there is brahma-jijnasa, or questions on the supreme
transcendence. All the living entities who are in the material world
are struggling very hard for existence. For them the Lord, after
creation of the material world, gave the Vedic wisdom advising how to
live and get rid of the material entanglement. When the activities for
sense gratification, namely the karma-kanda chapter, are finished, then
the chance for spiritual realization is offered in the form of the
Upanisads, which are part of different Vedas, as the Bhagavad-gita is a
part of the fifth Veda, namely the Mahabharata. The Upanisads mark the
beginning of transcendental life.
As long as the material body exists, there are actions and reactions in
the material modes. One has to learn tolerance in the face of dualities
such as happiness and distress, or cold and warmth, and by tolerating
such dualities become free from anxieties regarding gain and loss. This
transcendental position is achieved in full Krsna consciousness when
one is fully dependent on the good will of Krsna.

TEXT 46

yavan artha udapane
sarvatah samplutodake
tavan sarvesu vedesu
brahmanasya vijanatah

SYNONYMS

yavan--all that; arthah--is meant; uda-pane--in a well of water;
sarvatah--in all respects; sampluta-udake--in a great reservoir of
water; tavan--similarly; sarvesu--in all; vedesu--Vedic literatures;
brahmanasya--of the man who knows the Supreme Brahman; vijanatah--of
one who is in complete knowledge.



TRANSLATION

All purposes that are served by the small pond can at once be served by
the great reservoirs of water. Similarly, all the purposes of the Vedas
can be served to one who knows the purpose behind them.

PURPORT

The rituals and sacrifices mentioned in the karma-kanda division of the
Vedic literature are to encourage gradual development of self-
realization. And the purpose of self-realization is clearly stated in
the Fifteenth Chapter of the Bhagavad-gita (15.15): the purpose of
studying the Vedas is to know Lord Krsna, the primeval cause of
everything. So, self-realization means understanding Krsna and one's
eternal relationship with Him. The relationship of the living entities
with Krsna is also mentioned in the Fifteenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gita
(15.7). The living entities are parts and parcels of Krsna; therefore,
revival of Krsna consciousness by the individual living entity is the
highest perfectional stage of Vedic knowledge. This is confirmed in the
Srimad-Bhagavatam (3.33.7) as follows:

aho bata sva-paco 'to gariyan
yaj-jihvagre vartate nama tubhyam
tepus tapas te juhuvuh sasnur arya
brahmanucur nama grnanti ye te

"O my Lord, a person who is chanting Your holy name, although born of a
low family like that of a candala [dog-eater] is situated on the
highest platform of self-realization. Such a person must have performed
all kinds of penances and sacrifices according to Vedic rituals and
studied the Vedic literatures many, many times after taking his bath in
all the holy places of pilgrimage. Such a person is considered to be
the best of the Aryan family."
So one must be intelligent enough to understand the purpose of the
Vedas, without being attached to the rituals only, and must not desire
to be elevated to the heavenly kingdoms for a better quality of sense
gratification. It is not possible for the common man in this age to
follow all the rules and regulations of Vedic rituals and the
injunctions of the Vedanta and the Upanisads. It requires much time,
energy, knowledge and resources to execute the purposes of the Vedas.
This is hardly possible in this age. The best purpose of Vedic culture
is served, however, by chanting the holy name of the Lord, as
recommended by Lord Caitanya, the deliverer of all fallen souls. When
Lord Caitanya was asked by a great Vedic scholar, Prakasananda
Sarasvati, why He, the Lord, was chanting the holy name of the Lord
like a sentimentalist instead of studying Vedanta philosophy, the Lord
replied that His spiritual master found Him to be a great fool and thus
asked Him to chant the holy name of Lord Krsna. He did so, and became
ecstatic like a madman. In this Age of Kali, most of the population is
foolish and not adequately educated to understand Vedanta philosophy;
the best purpose of Vedanta philosophy is served by inoffensively
chanting the holy name of the Lord. Vedanta is the last word in Vedic
wisdom, and the author and knower of the Vedanta philosophy is Lord
Krsna; and the highest Vedantist is the great soul who takes pleasure
in chanting the holy name of the Lord. That is the ultimate purpose of
all Vedic mysticism.



TEXT 47

karmany evadhikaras te
ma phalesu kadacana
ma karma-phala-hetur bhur
ma te sango 'stv akarmani

SYNONYMS

karmani--prescribed duties; eva--certainly; adhikarah--right; te--of
you; ma--never; phalesu--in the fruits; kadacana--at any time; ma--
never; karma-phala--in the result of the work; hetuh--cause; bhuh--
become; ma--never; te--of you; sangah--attachment; astu--be there;
akarmani--in not doing.

TRANSLATION

You have a right to perform your prescribed duty, but you are not
entitled to the fruits of action. Never consider yourself to be the
cause of the results of your activities, and never be attached to not
doing your duty.

PURPORT

There are three considerations here: prescribed duties, capricious
work, and inaction. Prescribed duties refer to activities performed
while one is in the modes of material nature. Capricious work means
actions without the sanction of authority, and inaction means not
performing one's prescribed duties. The Lord advised that Arjuna not be
inactive, but that he perform his prescribed duty without being
attached to the result. One who is attached to the result of his work
is also the cause of the action. Thus he is the enjoyer or sufferer of
the result of such actions.
As far as prescribed duties are concerned, they can be fitted into
three subdivisions, namely routine work, emergency work and desired
activities. Routine work, in terms of the scriptural injunctions, is
done without desire for results. As one has to do it, obligatory work
is action in the mode of goodness. Work with results becomes the cause
of bondage; therefore such work is not auspicious. Everyone has his
proprietary right in regard to prescribed duties, but should act
without attachment to the result; such disinterested obligatory duties
doubtlessly lead one to the path of liberation.
Arjuna was therefore advised by the Lord to fight as a matter of duty
without attachment to the result. His nonparticipation in the battle is
another side of attachment. Such attachment never leads one to the path
of salvation. Any attachment, positive or negative, is cause for
bondage. Inaction is sinful. Therefore, fighting as a matter of duty
was the only auspicious path of salvation for Arjuna.

TEXT 48

yoga-sthah kuru karmani
sangam tyaktva dhananjaya
siddhy-asiddhyoh samo bhutva
samatvam yoga ucyate

SYNONYMS



yoga-sthah--steadfast in yoga; kuru--perform; karmani--your duties;
sangam--attachment; tyaktva--having abandoned; dhananjaya--O
Dhananjaya; siddhi-asiddhyoh--success and failure; samah--the same;
bhutva--having become; samatvam--evenness of mind; yogah--yoga; ucyate-
-is called.

TRANSLATION

Be steadfast in yoga, O Arjuna. Perform your duty and abandon all
attachment to success or failure. Such evenness of mind is called yoga.

PURPORT

Krsna tells Arjuna that he should act in yoga. And what is that yoga?
Yoga means to concentrate the mind upon the Supreme by controlling the
ever-disturbing senses. And who is the Supreme? The Supreme is the
Lord. And because He Himself is telling Arjuna to fight, Arjuna has
nothing to do with the results of the fight. Gain or victory are
Krsna's concern; Arjuna is simply advised to act according to the
dictation of Krsna. The following of Krsna's dictation is real yoga,
and this is practiced in the process called Krsna consciousness. By
Krsna consciousness only can one give up the sense of proprietorship.
One has to become the servant of Krsna, or the servant of the servant
of Krsna. That is the right way to discharge duty in Krsna
consciousness, which alone can help one to act in yoga.
Arjuna is a ksatriya, and as such he is participating in the
varnasrama-dharma institution. It is said in the Visnu Purana that in
the varnasrama-dharma, the whole aim is to satisfy Visnu. No one should
satisfy himself, as is the rule in the material world, but one should
satisfy Krsna. So, unless one satisfies Krsna, one cannot correctly
observe the principles of varnasrama-dharma. Indirectly, Arjuna was
advised to act as Krsna told him.

TEXT 49

durena hy avaram karma
buddhi-yogad dhananjaya
buddhau saranam anviccha
krpanah phala-hetavah

SYNONYMS

durena--by discarding it at a long distance; hi--certainly; avaram--
abominable; karma--activities; buddhi-yogat--on the strength of Krsna
consciousness; dhananjaya--O conqueror of wealth; buddhau--in such
consciousness; saranam--full surrender; anviccha--desire; krpanah--the
misers; phala-hetavah--those desiring fruitive action.

TRANSLATION

O Dhananjaya, rid yourself of all fruitive activities by devotional
service, and surrender fully to that consciousness. Those who want to
enjoy the fruits of their work are misers.

PURPORT

One who has actually come to understand one's constitutional position
as an eternal servitor of the Lord gives up all engagements save



working in Krsna consciousness. As already explained, buddhi-yoga means
transcendental loving service to the Lord. Such devotional service is
the right course of action for the living entity. Only misers desire to
enjoy the fruit of their own work just to be further entangled in
material bondage. Except for work in Krsna consciousness, all
activities are abominable because they continually bind the worker to
the cycle of birth and death. One should therefore never desire to be
the cause of work. Everything should be done in Krsna consciousness,
for the satisfaction of Krsna. Misers do not know how to utilize the
assets of riches which they acquire by good fortune or by hard labor.
One should spend all energies working in Krsna consciousness, and that
will make one's life successful. Like the misers, unfortunate persons
do not employ their human energy in the service of the Lord.

TEXT 50

buddhi-yukto jahatiha
ubhe sukrta-duskrte
tasmad yogaya yujyasva
yogah karmasu kausalam

SYNONYMS

buddhi-yuktah--one who is engaged in devotional service; jahati--can
get rid of; iha--in this life; ubhe--in both; sukrta-duskrte--in good
and bad results; tasmat--therefore; yogaya--for the sake of devotional
service; yujyasva--be so engaged; yogah--Krsna consciousness; karmasu--
in all activities; kausalam--art.

TRANSLATION

A man engaged in devotional service rids himself of both good and bad
actions even in this life. Therefore strive for yoga, O Arjuna, which
is the art of all work.

PURPORT

Since time immemorial each living entity has accumulated the various
reactions of his good and bad work. As such, he is continuously
ignorant of his real constitutional position. One's ignorance can be
removed by the instruction of the Bhagavad-gita which teaches one to
surrender unto Lord Sri Krsna in all respects and become liberated from
the chained victimization of action and reaction, birth after birth.
Arjuna is therefore advised to act in Krsna consciousness, the
purifying process of resultant action.

TEXT 51

karma-jam buddhi-yukta hi
phalam tyaktva manisinah
janma-bandha-vinirmuktah
padam gacchanty anamayam

SYNONYMS

karma-jam--because of fruitive activities; buddhi-yuktah--being done in
devotional service; hi--certainly; phalam--results; tyaktva--giving up;
manisinah--devotees who are great sages; janma-bandha--the bondage of



birth and death; vinirmuktah--liberated soul; padam--position;
gacchanti--reached; anamayam--without miseries.

TRANSLATION

The wise, engaged in devotional service, take refuge in the Lord, and
free themselves from the cycle of birth and death by renouncing the
fruits of action in the material world. In this way they can attain
that state beyond all miseries.

PURPORT

The liberated living entities seek that place where there are no
material miseries. The Bhagavatam (10.14.58) says:

samasrita ye pada-pallava-plavam
mahat-padam punya-yaso murareh
bhavambudhir vatsa-padam param padam
padam padam yad vipadam na tesam

"For one who has accepted the boat of the lotus feet of the Lord, who
is the shelter of the cosmic manifestation and is famous as Mukunda or
the giver of mukti, the ocean of the material world is like the water
contained in a calf's hoofprint. param padam, or the place where there
are no material miseries, or Vaikuntha, is his goal, not the place
where there is danger in every step of life."
Owing to ignorance, one does not know that this material world is a
miserable place where there are dangers at every step. Out of ignorance
only, less intelligent persons try to adjust to the situation by
fruitive activities, thinking that the resultant actions will make them
happy. They do not know that no kind of material body anywhere within
the universe can give life without miseries. The miseries of life,
namely birth, death, old age and diseases, are present everywhere
within the material world. But one who understands his real
constitutional position as the eternal servitor of the Lord, and thus
knows the position of the Personality of Godhead, engages himself in
the transcendental loving service of the Lord. Consequently he becomes
qualified to enter into the Vaikuntha planets, where there is neither
material, miserable life nor the influence of time and death. To know
one's constitutional position means to know also the sublime position
of the Lord. One who wrongly thinks that the living entity's position
and the Lord's position are on the same level is to be understood to be
in darkness and therefore unable to engage himself in the devotional
service of the Lord. He becomes a lord himself and thus paves the way
for the repetition of birth and death. The one who, understanding that
his position is to serve, transfers himself to the service of the Lord,
at once becomes eligible for Vaikunthaloka. Service for the cause of
the Lord is called karma-yoga or buddhi-yoga, or in plain words,
devotional service to the Lord.

TEXT 52

yada te moha-kalilam
buddhir vyatitarisyati
tada gantasi nirvedam
srotavyasya srutasya ca

SYNONYMS



yada--when; te--your; moha--illusory; kalilam--dense forest; buddhih--
transcendental service with intelligence; vyatitarisyati--surpasses;
tada--at that time; ganta asi--you shall go; nirvedam--callousness;
srotavyasya--all that is to be heard; srutasya--all that is already
heard; ca--also.

TRANSLATION

When your intelligence has passed out of the dense forest of delusion,
you shall become indifferent to all that has been heard and all that is
to be heard.

PURPORT

There are many good examples in the lives of the great devotees of the
Lord of those who became indifferent to the rituals of the Vedas simply
by devotional service to the Lord. When a person factually understands
Krsna and his relationship with Krsna, he naturally becomes completely
indifferent to the rituals of fruitive activities, even though an
experienced brahmana. Sri Madhavendra Puri, a great devotee and acarya
in the line of the devotees, says:

sandhya-vandana bhadram astu bhavato bhoh snana tubhyam namo
bho devah pitaras ca tarpana-vidhau naham ksamah ksamyatam
yatra kvapi nisadya yadava-kulottamasya kamsa-dvisah
smaram smaram agham harami tad alam manye kim anyena me

"O Lord, in my prayers three times a day, all glory to you. Bathing, I
offer my obeisances unto you. O demigods! O forefathers! Please excuse
me for my inability to offer you my respects. Now wherever I sit, I can
remember the great descendant of the Yadu dynasty [Krsna], the enemy of
Kamsa, and thereby I can free myself from all sinful bondage. I think
this is sufficient for me."
The Vedic rites and rituals are imperative for neophytes: comprehending
all kinds of prayer three times a day, taking a bath early in the
morning, offering respects to the forefathers, etc. But, when one is
fully in Krsna consciousness and is engaged in His transcendental
loving service, one becomes indifferent to all these regulative
principles because he has already attained perfection. If one can reach
the platform of understanding by service to the Supreme Lord Krsna, he
has no longer to execute different types of penances and sacrifices as
recommended in revealed scriptures. And, similarly, if one has not
understood that the purpose of the Vedas is to reach Krsna and simply
engages in the rituals, etc., then he is uselessly wasting time in such
engagements. Persons in Krsna consciousness transcend the limit of
sabda-brahma, or the range of the Vedas and Upanisads.

TEXT 53

sruti-vipratipanna te
yada sthasyati niscala
samadhav acala buddhis
tada yogam avapsyasi

SYNONYMS



sruti--Vedic revelation; vipratipanna--without being influenced by the
fruitive results of the Vedas; te--your; yada--when; sthasyati--
remains; niscala--unmoved; samadhau--in transcendental consciousness,
or Krsna consciousness; acala--unflinching; buddhih--intelligence;
tada--at that time; yogam--self-realization; avapsyasi--you will
achieve.

TRANSLATION

When your mind is no longer disturbed by the flowery language of the
Vedas, and when it remains fixed in the trance of self-realization,
then you will have attained the divine consciousness.

PURPORT

To say that one is in samadhi is to say that one has fully realized
Krsna consciousness; that is, one in full samadhi has realized Brahman,
Paramatma and Bhagavan. The highest perfection of self-realization is
to understand that one is eternally the servitor of Krsna and that
one's only business is to discharge one's duties in Krsna
consciousness. A Krsna conscious person, or unflinching devotee of the
Lord, should not be disturbed by the flowery language of the Vedas nor
be engaged in fruitive activities for promotion to the heavenly
kingdom. In Krsna consciousness, one comes directly into communion with
Krsna, and thus all directions from Krsna may be understood in that
transcendental state. One is sure to achieve results by such activities
and attain conclusive knowledge. One has only to carry out the orders
of Krsna or His representative, the spiritual master.

TEXT 54

arjuna uvaca
sthita-prajnasya ka bhasa
samadhi-sthasya kesava
sthita-dhih kim prabhaseta
kim asita vrajeta kim

SYNONYMS

arjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; sthita-prajnasya--of one who is situated in
fixed Krsna consciousness; ka--what; bhasa--language; samadhi-sthasya--
of one situated in trance; kesava--O Krsna; sthita-dhih--one fixed in
Krsna consciousness; kim--what; prabhaseta--speak; kim--how; asita--
does remain; vrajeta--walks; kim--how.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: O Krsna, what are the symptoms of one whose consciousness
is thus merged in transcendence? How does he speak, and what is his
language? How does he sit, and how does he walk?

PURPORT

As there are symptoms for each and every man, in terms of his
particular situation, similarly one who is Krsna conscious has his
particular nature--talking, walking, thinking, feeling, etc. As a rich
man has his symptoms by which he is known as a rich man, as a diseased
man has his symptoms, by which he is known as diseased, or as a learned



man has his symptoms, so a man in transcendental consciousness of Krsna
has specific symptoms in various dealings. One can know his specific
symptoms from the Bhagavad-gita. Most important is how the man in Krsna
consciousness speaks, for speech is the most important quality of any
man. It is said that a fool is undiscovered as long as he does not
speak, and certainly a well-dressed fool cannot be identified unless he
speaks, but as soon as he speaks, he reveals himself at once. The
immediate symptom of a Krsna conscious man is that he speaks only of
Krsna and of matters relating to Him. Other symptoms then automatically
follow, as stated below.

TEXT 55

sri-bhagavan uvaca
prajahati yada kaman
sarvan partha mano-gatan
atmany evatmana tustah
sthita-prajnas tadocyate

SYNONYMS

sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; prajahati-
-gives up; yada--when; kaman--desires for sense gratification; sarvan--
of all varieties; partha--O son of Prtha; manah-gatan--of mental
concoction; atmani--in the pure state of the soul; eva--certainly;
atmana--by the purified mind; tustah--satisfied; sthita-prajnah--
transcendentally situated; tada--at that time; ucyate--is said.

TRANSLATION

The Blessed Lord said: O Partha, when a man gives up all varieties of
sense desire which arise from mental concoction, and when his mind
finds satisfaction in the self alone, then he is said to be in pure
transcendental consciousness.

PURPORT

The Bhagavatam affirms that any person who is fully in Krsna
consciousness, or devotional service of the Lord, has all the good
qualities of the great sages, whereas a person who is not so
transcendentally situated has no good qualifications, because he is
sure to be taking refuge in his own mental concoctions. Consequently,
it is rightly said herein that one has to give up all kinds of sense
desire manufactured by mental concoction. Artificially, such sense
desires cannot be stopped. But if one is engaged in Krsna
consciousness, then, automatically, sense desires subside without
extraneous efforts. Therefore, one has to engage himself in Krsna
consciousness without hesitation, for this devotional service will
instantly help one onto the platform of transcendental consciousness.
The highly developed soul always remains satisfied in himself by
realizing himself as the eternal servitor of the Supreme Lord. Such a
transcendentally situated person has no sense desires resulting from
petty materialism; rather, he remains always happy in his natural
position of eternally serving the Supreme Lord.

TEXT 56

duhkhesv anudvigna-manah



sukhesu vigata-sprhah
vita-raga-bhaya-krodhah
sthita-dhir munir ucyate

SYNONYMS

duhkhesu--in the threefold miseries; anudvigna-manah--without being
agitated in mind; sukhesu--in happiness; vigata-sprhah--without being
too interested; vita--free from; raga--attachment; bhaya--fear;
krodhah--anger; sthita-dhih--one who is steady; munih--a sage; ucyate--
is called.

TRANSLATION

One who is not disturbed in spite of the threefold miseries, who is not
elated when there is happiness, and who is free from attachment, fear
and anger, is called a sage of steady mind.

PURPORT

The word muni means one who can agitate his mind in various ways for
mental speculation without coming to a factual conclusion. It is said
that every muni has a different angle of vision, and unless a muni
differs from other munis, he cannot be called a muni in the strict
sense of the term. Nasav rsir yasya matam na bhinnam (Mahabharata,
Vana-parva 313.117). But a sthita-dhir muni, as mentioned herein by the
Lord, is different from an ordinary muni. The sthita-dhir muni is
always in Krsna consciousness, for he has exhausted all his business of
creative speculation. He has surpassed the stage of mental speculations
and has come to the conclusion that Lord Sri Krsna, or Vasudeva, is
everything (vasudevah sarvam iti sa mahatma su-durlabhah). He is called
a muni fixed in mind. Such a fully Krsna conscious person is not at all
disturbed by the onslaughts of the threefold miseries, for he accepts
all miseries as the mercy of the Lord, thinking himself only worthy of
more trouble due to his past misdeeds; and he sees that his miseries,
by the grace of the Lord, are minimized to the lowest. Similarly, when
he is happy he gives credit to the Lord, thinking himself unworthy of
the happiness; he realizes that it is due only to the Lord's grace that
he is in such a comfortable condition and able to render better service
to the Lord. And, for the service of the Lord, he is always daring and
active and is not influenced by attachment or aversion. Attachment
means accepting things for one's own sense gratification, and
detachment is the absence of such sensual attachment. But one fixed in
Krsna consciousness has neither attachment nor detachment because his
life is dedicated in the service of the Lord. Consequently he is not at
all angry even when his attempts are unsuccessful. A Krsna conscious
person is always steady in his determination.

TEXT 57

yah sarvatranabhisnehas
tat tat prapya subhasubham
nabhinandati na dvesti
tasya prajna pratisthita

SYNONYMS



yah--one who; sarvatra--everywhere; anabhisnehah--without affection;
tat--that; tat--that; prapya--achieving; subha--good; asubham--evil;
na--never; abhinandati--praise; na--never; dvesti--envies; tasya--his;
prajna--perfect knowledge; pratisthita--fixed.

TRANSLATION

He who is without attachment, who does not rejoice when he obtains
good, nor lament when he obtains evil, is firmly fixed in perfect
knowledge.

PURPORT

There is always some upheaval in the material world which may be good
or evil. One who is not agitated by such material upheavals, who is
unaffected by good and evil, is to be understood to be fixed in Krsna
consciousness. As long as one is in the material world there is always
the possibility of good and evil because this world is full of duality.
But one who is fixed in Krsna consciousness is not affected by good and
evil, because he is simply concerned with Krsna, who is all-good
absolute. Such consciousness in Krsna situates one in a perfect
transcendental position called, technically, samadhi.

TEXT 58

yada samharate cayam
kurmo 'nganiva sarvasah
indriyanindriyarthebhyas
tasya prajna pratisthita

SYNONYMS

yada--when; samharate--winds up; ca--also; ayam--all these; kurmah--
tortoise; angani--limbs; iva--like; sarvasah--altogether; indriyani--
senses; indriya-arthebhyah--from the sense objects; tasya--his; prajna-
-consciousness; pratisthita--fixed up.

TRANSLATION

One who is able to withdraw his senses from sense objects, as the
tortoise draws its limbs within the shell, is to be understood as truly
situated in knowledge.

PURPORT

The test of a yogi, devotee, or self-realized soul is that he is able
to control the senses according to his plan. Most people, however, are
servants of the senses and are thus directed by the dictation of the
senses. That is the answer to the question as to how the yogi is
situated. The senses are compared to venomous serpents. They want to
act very loosely and without restriction. The yogi, or the devotee,
must be very strong to control the serpents--like a snake charmer. He
never allows them to act independently. There are many injunctions in
the revealed scriptures; some of them are do-not's, and some of them
are do's. Unless one is able to follow the do's and the do-not's,
restricting oneself from sense enjoyment, it is not possible to be
firmly fixed in Krsna consciousness. The best example, set herein, is
the tortoise. The tortoise can at any moment wind up his senses and



exhibit them again at any time for particular purposes. Similarly, the
senses of the Krsna conscious persons are used only for some particular
purpose in the service of the Lord and are withdrawn otherwise. Keeping
the senses always in the service of the Lord is the example set by the
analogy of the tortoise, who keeps the senses within.

TEXT 59

visaya vinivartante
niraharasya dehinah
rasa-varjam raso 'py asya
param drstva nivartate

SYNONYMS

visayah--objects for sense enjoyment; vinivartante--are practiced to be
refrained from; niraharasya--by negative restrictions; dehinah--for the
embodied; rasa-varjam--giving up the taste; rasah--sense of enjoyment;
api--although there is; asya--his; param--far superior things; drstva--
by experiencing; nivartate--ceases from.

TRANSLATION

The embodied soul may be restricted from sense enjoyment, though the
taste for sense objects remains. But, ceasing such engagements by
experiencing a higher taste, he is fixed in consciousness.

PURPORT

Unless one is transcendentally situated, it is not possible to cease
from sense enjoyment. The process of restriction from sense enjoyment
by rules and regulations is something like restricting a diseased
person from certain types of eatables. The patient, however, neither
likes such restrictions nor loses his taste for eatables. Similarly,
sense restriction by some spiritual process like astanga-yoga, in the
matter of yama, niyama, asana, pranayama, pratyahara, dharana, dhyana,
etc., is recommended for less intelligent persons who have no better
knowledge. But one who has tasted the beauty of the Supreme Lord Krsna,
in the course of his advancement in Krsna consciousness, no longer has
a taste for dead material things. Therefore, restrictions are there for
the less intelligent neophytes in the spiritual advancement of life,
but such restrictions are only good if one actually has a taste for
Krsna consciousness. When one is actually Krsna conscious, he
automatically loses his taste for pale things.

TEXT 60

yatato hy api kaunteya
purusasya vipascitah
indriyani pramathini
haranti prasabham manah

SYNONYMS

yatatah--while endeavoring; hi--certainly; api--in spite of; kaunteya--
O son of Kunti; purusasya--of the man; vipascitah--full of
discriminating knowledge; indriyani--the senses; pramathini--



stimulated; haranti--throws forcefully; prasabham--by force; manah--the
mind.

TRANSLATION

The senses are so strong and impetuous, O Arjuna, that they forcibly
carry away the mind even of a man of discrimination who is endeavoring
to control them.

PURPORT

There are many learned sages, philosophers and transcendentalists who
try to conquer the senses, but in spite of their endeavors, even the
greatest of them sometimes fall victim to material sense enjoyment due
to the agitated mind. Even Visvamitra, a great sage and perfect yogi,
was misled by Menaka into sex enjoyment, although the yogi was
endeavoring for sense control with severe types of penance and yoga
practice. And, of course, there are so many similar instances in the
history of the world. Therefore, it is very difficult to control the
mind and senses without being fully Krsna conscious. Without engaging
the mind in Krsna, one cannot cease such material engagements. A
practical example is given by Sri Yamunacarya, a great saint and
devotee, who says:

yad-avadhi mama cetah krsna-padaravinde
nava-nava-rasa-dhamany udyatam rantum asit
tad-avadhi bata nari-sangame smaryamane
bhavati mukha-vikarah susthu nisthivanam ca

"Since my mind has been engaged in the service of the lotus feet of
Lord Krsna, and I have been enjoying an ever new transcendental humor,
whenever I think of sex life with a woman, my face at once turns from
it, and I spit at the thought."
Krsna consciousness is such a transcendentally nice thing that
automatically material enjoyment becomes distasteful. It is as if a
hungry man had satisfied his hunger by a sufficient quantity of
nutritious eatables. Maharaja Ambarisa also conquered a great yogi,
Durvasa Muni, simply because his mind was engaged in Krsna
consciousness (sa vai manah krsna-padaravindayor vacamsi vaikuntha-
gunanuvarnane).

TEXT 61

tani sarvani samyamya
yukta asita mat-parah
vase hi yasyendriyani
tasya prajna pratisthita

SYNONYMS

tani--those senses; sarvani--all; samyamya--keeping under control;
yuktah--being engaged; asita--being so situated; mat-parah--in
relationship with Me; vase--in full subjugation; hi--certainly; yasya--
one whose; indriyani--senses; tasya--his; prajna--consciousness;
pratisthita--fixed.

TRANSLATION



One who restrains his senses and fixes his consciousness upon Me, is
known as a man of steady intelligence.

PURPORT

That the highest conception of yoga perfection is Krsna consciousness
is clearly explained in this verse. And, unless one is Krsna conscious,
it is not at all possible to control the senses. As cited above, the
great sage Durvasa Muni picked a quarrel with Maharaja Ambarisa, and
Durvasa Muni unnecessarily became angry out of pride and therefore
could not check his senses. On the other hand, the king, although not
as powerful a yogi as the sage, but a devotee of the Lord, silently
tolerated all the sage's injustices and thereby emerged victorious. The
king was able to control his senses because of the following
qualifications, as mentioned in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (9.4.18-20):

sa vai manah krsna-padaravindayor
vacamsi vaikuntha-gunanuvarnane
karau harer mandira-marjanadisu
srutim cakaracyuta-sat-kathodaye

mukunda-lingalaya-darsane drsau
tad-bhrtya-gatra-sparse 'nga-sangamam
ghranam ca tat-pada-saroja-saurabhe
srimat-tulasya rasanam tad-arpite

padau hareh ksetra-padanusarpane
siro hrsikesa-padabhivandane
kamam ca dasye na tu kama-kamyaya
yathottama-sloka-janasraya ratih

"King Ambarisa fixed his mind on the lotus feet of Lord Krsna, engaged
his words in describing the abode of the Lord, his hands in cleansing
the temple of the Lord, his ears in hearing the pastimes of the Lord,
his eyes in seeing the form of the Lord, his body in touching the body
of the devotee, his nostrils in smelling the flavor of the flowers
offered to the lotus feet of the Lord, his tongue in tasting the tulasi
leaves offered to Him, his legs in traveling to the holy place where
His temple is situated, his head in offering obeisances unto the Lord,
and his desires in fulfilling the desires of the Lord... and all these
qualifications made him fit to become a mat-para devotee of the Lord."
The word mat-para is most significant in this connection. How one can
become mat-para is described in the life of Maharaja Ambarisa. Srila
Baladeva Vidyabhusana, a great scholar and acarya in the line of the
mat-para, remarks: mad-bhakti-prabhavena sarvendriya-vijaya-purvika
svatma-drstih sulabheti bhavah. "The senses can be completely
controlled only by the strength of devotional service to Krsna." Also,
the example of fire is sometimes given: "As the small flames within
burn everything within the room, similarly Lord Visnu, situated in the
heart of the yogi, burns up all kinds of impurities." The Yoga-sutra
also prescribes meditation on Visnu, and not meditation on the void.
The so-called yogis who meditate on something which is not the Visnu
form simply waste their time in a vain search after some
phantasmagoria. We have to be Krsna conscious--devoted to the
Personality of Godhead. This is the aim of the real yoga.

TEXT 62



dhyayato visayan pumsah
sangas tesupajayate
sangat sanjayate kamah
kamat krodho 'bhijayate

SYNONYMS

dhyayatah--while contemplating; visayan--sense objects; pumsah--of the
person; sangah--attachment; tesu--in the sense objects; upajayate--
develops; sangat--attachment; sanjayate--develops; kamah--desire;
kamat--from desire; krodhah--anger; abhijayate--becomes manifest.

TRANSLATION

While contemplating the objects of the senses, a person develops
attachment for them, and from such attachment lust develops, and from
lust anger arises.

PURPORT

One who is not Krsna conscious is subjected to material desires while
contemplating the objects of the senses. The senses require real
engagements, and if they are not engaged in the transcendental loving
service of the Lord, they will certainly seek engagement in the service
of materialism. In the material world everyone, including Lord Siva and
Lord Brahma--to say nothing of other demigods in the heavenly planets--
is subjected to the influence of sense objects, and the only method to
get out of this puzzle of material existence is to become Krsna
conscious. Lord Siva was deep in meditation, but when Parvati agitated
him for sense pleasure, he agreed to the proposal, and as a result
Kartikeya was born. When Haridasa Thakura was a young devotee of the
Lord, he was similarly allured by the incarnation of Maya-devi, but
Haridasa easily passed the test because of his unalloyed devotion to
Lord Krsna. As illustrated in the above-mentioned verse of Sri
Yamunacarya, a sincere devotee of the Lord shuns all material sense
enjoyment due to his higher taste for spiritual enjoyment in the
association of the Lord. That is the secret of success. One who is not,
therefore, in Krsna consciousness, however powerful he may be in
controlling the senses by artificial repression, is sure ultimately to
fail, for the slightest thought of sense pleasure will agitate him to
gratify his desires.

TEXT 63

krodhad bhavati sammohah
sammohat smrti-vibhramah
smrti-bhramsad buddhi-naso
buddhi-nasat pranasyati

SYNONYMS

krodhat--from anger; bhavati--takes place; sammohah--perfect illusion;
sammohat--from illusion; smrti--of memory; vibhramah--bewilderment;
smrti-bhramsat--after bewilderment of memory; buddhi-nasah--loss of
intelligence; buddhi-nasat--and from loss of intelligence; pranasyati--
falls down.

TRANSLATION



From anger, delusion arises, and from delusion bewilderment of memory.
When the memory is bewildered, intelligence is lost, and when
intelligence is lost, one falls down again into the material pool.

PURPORT

By development of Krsna consciousness one can know that everything has
its use in the service of the Lord. Those who are without knowledge of
Krsna consciousness artificially try to avoid material objects, and as
a result, although they desire liberation from material bondage, they
do not attain to the perfect stage of renunciation. On the other hand,
a person in Krsna consciousness knows how to use everything in the
service of the Lord; therefore he does not become a victim of material
consciousness. For example, for an impersonalist, the Lord, or the
Absolute, being impersonal, cannot eat. Whereas an impersonalist tries
to avoid good eatables, a devotee knows that Krsna is the supreme
enjoyer and that He eats all that is offered to Him in devotion. So,
after offering good eatables to the Lord, the devotee takes the
remnants, called prasadam. Thus everything becomes spiritualized and
there is no danger of a downfall. The devotee takes prasadam in Krsna
consciousness, whereas the nondevotee rejects it as material. The
impersonalist, therefore, cannot enjoy life due to his artificial
renunciation; and for this reason, a slight agitation of the mind pulls
him down again into the pool of material existence. It is said that
such a soul, even though rising up to the point of liberation, falls
down again due to his not having support in devotional service.

TEXT 64

raga-dvesa-vimuktais tu
visayan indriyais caran
atma-vasyair vidheyatma
prasadam adhigacchati

SYNONYMS

raga--attachment; dvesa--detachment; vimuktaih--by one who has been
free from such things; tu--but; visayan--sense objects; indriyaih--by
the senses; caran--acting; atma-vasyaih--one who has control over;
vidheya-atma--one who follows regulated freedom; prasadam--the mercy of
the Lord; adhigacchati--attains.

TRANSLATION

One who can control his senses by practicing the regulative principles
of freedom can obtain the complete mercy of the Lord and thus become
free from all attachment and aversion.

PURPORT

It is already explained that one may externally control the senses by
some artificial process, but unless the senses are engaged in the
transcendental service of the Lord, there is every chance of a fall.
Although the person in full Krsna consciousness may apparently be on
the sensual plane, because of his being Krsna conscious, he has no
attachment to sensual activities. The Krsna conscious person is
concerned only with the satisfaction of Krsna, and nothing else.



Therefore he is transcendental to all attachment. If Krsna wants, the
devotee can do anything which is ordinarily undesirable; and if Krsna
does not want, he shall not do that which he would have ordinarily done
for his own satisfaction. Therefore to act or not to act is within his
control because he acts only under the direction of Krsna. This
consciousness is the causeless mercy of the Lord, which the devotee can
achieve in spite of his being attached to the sensual platform.

TEXT 65

prasade sarva-duhkhanam
hanir asyopajayate
prasanna-cetaso hy asu
buddhih paryavatisthate

SYNONYMS

prasade--on achievement of the causeless mercy of the Lord; sarva--of
all; duhkhanam--material miseries; hanih--destruction; asya--his;
upajayate--takes place; prasanna-cetasah--of the happy-minded; hi--
certainly; asu--very soon; buddhih--intelligence; pari--sufficiently;
avatisthate--established.

TRANSLATION

For one who is so situated in the Divine consciousness, the threefold
miseries of material existence exist no longer; in such a happy state,
one's intelligence soon becomes steady.

TEXT 66

nasti buddhir ayuktasya
na cayuktasya bhavana
na cabhavayatah santir
asantasya kutah sukham

SYNONYMS

na asti--there cannot be; buddhih--transcendental intelligence;
ayuktasya--of one who is not connected (with Krsna consciousness); na--
neither; ca--and; ayuktasya--of one devoid of Krsna consciousness;
bhavana--mind fixed in happiness; na--neither; ca--and; abhavayatah--
one who is not fixed; santih--peace; asantasya--of the unpeaceful;
kutah--where is; sukham--happiness.

TRANSLATION

One who is not in transcendental consciousness can have neither a
controlled mind nor steady intelligence, without which there is no
possibility of peace. And how can there be any happiness without peace?

PURPORT

Unless one is in Krsna consciousness there is no possibility of peace.
So it is confirmed in the Fifth Chapter (5.29) that when one
understands that Krsna is the only enjoyer of all the good results of
sacrifice and penance, and that He is the proprietor of all universal
manifestations, that He is the real friend of all living entities, then



only can one have real peace. Therefore, if one is not in Krsna
consciousness, there cannot be a final goal for the mind. Disturbance
is due to want of an ultimate goal, and when one is certain that Krsna
is the enjoyer, proprietor and friend of everyone and everything, then
one can, with a steady mind, bring about peace. Therefore, one who is
engaged without a relationship with Krsna is certainly always in
distress and is without peace, however much he may make a show of peace
and spiritual advancement in life. Krsna consciousness is a self-
manifested peaceful condition which can be achieved only in
relationship with Krsna.

TEXT 67

indriyanam hi caratam
yan mano 'nuvidhiyate
tad asya harati prajnam
vayur navam ivambhasi

SYNONYMS

indriyanam--of the senses; hi--certainly; caratam--while herding over;
yat--that; manah--mind; anuvidhiyate--becomes constantly engaged; tat--
that; asya--his; harati--takes away; prajnam--intelligence; vayuh--
wind; navam--a boat; iva--like; ambhasi--on the water.

TRANSLATION

As a boat on the water is swept away by a strong wind, even one of the
senses on which the mind focuses can carry away a man's intelligence.

PURPORT

Unless all of the senses are engaged in the service of the Lord, even
one of them engaged in sense gratification can deviate the devotee from
the path of transcendental advancement. As mentioned in the life of
Maharaja Ambarisa, all of the senses must be engaged in Krsna
consciousness, for that is the correct technique for controlling the
mind.

TEXT 68

tasmad yasya maha-baho
nigrhitani sarvasah
indriyanindriyarthebhyas
tasya prajna pratisthita

SYNONYMS

tasmat--therefore; yasya--of one's; maha-baho--O mighty-armed one;
nigrhitani--so curbed down; sarvasah--all around; indriyani--the
senses; indriya-arthebhyah--for the sake of sense objects; tasya--his;
prajna--intelligence; pratisthita--fixed.

TRANSLATION

Therefore, O mighty-armed, one whose senses are restrained from their
objects is certainly of steady intelligence.



PURPORT

As enemies are curbed by superior force, similarly the senses, can be
curbed not by any human endeavor, but only by keeping them engaged in
the service of the Lord. One who has understood this--that only by
Krsna consciousness is one really established in intelligence and that
one should practice this art under the guidance of a bona fide
spiritual master--is called sadhaka, or a suitable candidate for
liberation.

TEXT 69

ya nisa sarva-bhutanam
tasyam jagarti samyami
yasyam jagrati bhutani
sa nisa pasyato muneh

SYNONYMS

ya--what; nisa--is night; sarva--all; bhutanam--of living entities;
tasyam--in that; jagarti--wakeful; samyami--the self-controlled;
yasyam--in which; jagrati--awake; bhutani--all beings; sa--that is;
nisa--night; pasyatah--for the introspective; muneh--sage.

TRANSLATION

What is night for all beings is the time of awakening for the self-
controlled; and the time of awakening for all beings is night for the
introspective sage.

PURPORT

There are two classes of intelligent men. The one is intelligent in
material activities for sense gratification, and the other is
introspective and awake to the cultivation of self-realization.
Activities of the introspective sage, or thoughtful man, are night for
persons materially absorbed. Materialistic persons remain asleep in
such a night due to their ignorance of self-realization. The
introspective sage remains alert in the "night" of the materialistic
men. The sage feels transcendental pleasure in the gradual advancement
of spiritual culture, whereas the man in materialistic activities,
being asleep to self-realization, dreams of varieties of sense
pleasure, feeling sometimes happy and sometimes distressed in his
sleeping condition. The introspective man is always indifferent to
materialistic happiness and distress. He goes on with his self-
realization activities undisturbed by material reactions.

TEXT 70

apuryamanam acala-pratistham
samudram apah pravisanti yadvat
tadvat kama yam pravisanti sarve
sa santim apnoti na kama-kami

SYNONYMS

apuryamanam--always filled; acala-pratistham--steadily situated;
samudram--the ocean; apah--water; pravisanti--enter; yadvat--as;



tadvat--so; kamah--desires; yam--unto one; pravisanti--enter; sarve--
all; sah--that person; santim--peace; apnoti--achieves; na--not; kama-
kami--one who desires to fulfill desires.

TRANSLATION

A person who is not disturbed by the incessant flow of desires--that
enter like rivers into the ocean which is ever being filled but is
always still--can alone achieve peace, and not the man who strives to
satisfy such desires.

PURPORT

Although the vast ocean is always filled with water, it is always,
especially during the rainy season, being filled with much more water.
But the ocean remains the same--steady; it is not agitated, nor does it
cross beyond the limit of its brink. That is also true of a person
fixed in Krsna consciousness. As long as one has the material body, the
demands of the body for sense gratification will continue. The devotee,
however, is not in need of anything because the Lord fulfills all his
material necessities. Therefore he is like the ocean--always full in
himself. Desires may come to him like the waters of the rivers that
flow into the ocean, but he is steady in his activities, and he is not
even slightly disturbed by desires for sense gratification. That is the
proof of a Krsna conscious man--one who has lost all inclinations for
material sense gratification, although the desires are present. Because
he remains satisfied in the transcendental loving service of the Lord,
he can remain steady, like the ocean, and therefore enjoy full peace.
Others, however, who fulfill desires even up to the limit of
liberation, what to speak of material success, never attain peace. The
fruitive workers, the salvationists, and also the yogis who are after
mystic powers, are all unhappy because of unfulfilled desires. But the
person in Krsna consciousness is happy in the service of the Lord, and
he has no desires to be fulfilled. In fact, he does not even desire
liberation from the so-called material bondage. The devotees of Krsna
have no material desires, and therefore they are in perfect peace.

TEXT 71

vihaya kaman yah sarvan
pumams carati nihsprhah
nirmamo nirahankarah
sa santim adhigacchati

SYNONYMS

vihaya--after giving up; kaman--all material desires for sense
gratification; yah--the person; sarvan--all; puman--a person; carati--
lives; nihsprhah--desireless; nirmamah--without a sense of
proprietorship; nirahankarah--without false ego; sah--all; santim--
perfect peace; adhigacchati--attains.

TRANSLATION

A person who has given up all desires for sense gratification, who
lives free from desires, who has given up all sense of proprietorship
and is devoid of false ego--he alone can attain real peace.



PURPORT

To become desireless means not to desire anything for sense
gratification. In other words, desire for becoming Krsna conscious is
actually desirelessness. To understand one's actual position as the
eternal servitor of Krsna, without falsely claiming this material body
to be oneself and without falsely claiming proprietorship over anything
in the world, is the perfect stage of Krsna consciousness. One who is
situated in this perfect stage knows that because Krsna is the
proprietor of everything, therefore everything must be used for the
satisfaction of Krsna. Arjuna did not want to fight for his own sense
satisfaction, but when he became fully Krsna conscious he fought
because Krsna wanted him to fight. For himself there was no desire to
fight, but for Krsna the same Arjuna fought to his best ability. Desire
for the satisfaction of Krsna is really desirelessness; it is not an
artificial attempt to abolish desires. The living entity cannot be
desireless or senseless, but he does have to change the quality of the
desires. A materially desireless person certainly knows that everything
belongs to Krsna (isavasyam idam sarvam), and therefore he does not
falsely claim proprietorship over anything. This transcendental
knowledge is based on self-realization--namely, knowing perfectly well
that every living entity is the eternal part and parcel of Krsna in
spiritual identity, and therefore the eternal position of the living
entity is never on the level of Krsna or greater than Him. This
understanding of Krsna consciousness is the basic principle of real
peace.

TEXT 72

esa brahmi sthitih partha
nainam prapya vimuhyati
sthitvasyam anta-kale 'pi
brahma-nirvanam rcchati

SYNONYMS

esa--this; brahmi--spiritual; sthitih--situation; partha--O son of
Prtha; na--never; enam--this; prapya--achieving; vimuhyati--bewilders;
sthitva--being so situated; asyam--being so; anta-kale--at the end of
life; api--also; brahma-nirvanam--spiritual (kingdom of God); rcchati--
attains.

TRANSLATION

That is the way of the spiritual and godly life, after attaining which
a man is not bewildered. Being so situated even at the hour of death,
one can enter into the kingdom of God.

PURPORT

One can attain Krsna consciousness or divine life at once, within a
second--or one may not attain such a state of life even after millions
of births. It is only a matter of understanding and accepting the fact.
Khatvanga Maharaja attained this state of life just a few minutes
before his death, by surrendering unto Krsna. Nirvana means ending the
process of materialistic life. According to Buddhist philosophy, there
is only void after the completion of this material life, but Bhagavad-
gita teaches differently. Actual life begins after the completion of



this material life. For the gross materialist it is sufficient to know
that one has to end this materialistic way of life, but for persons who
are spiritually advanced, there is another life after this
materialistic life. Before ending this life, if one fortunately becomes
Krsna conscious, he at once attains the stage of brahma-nirvana. There
is no difference between the kingdom of God and the devotional service
of the Lord. Since both of them are on the absolute plane, to be
engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord is to have
attained the spiritual kingdom. In the material world there are
activities of sense gratification, whereas in the spiritual world there
are activities of Krsna consciousness. Attainment of Krsna
consciousness even during this life is immediate attainment of Brahman,
and one who is situated in Krsna consciousness has certainly already
entered into the kingdom of God.
Brahman is just the opposite of matter. Therefore brahmi sthiti means
"not on the platform of material activities." Devotional service of the
Lord is accepted in the Bhagavad-gita as the liberated stage (sa gunan
samatityaitan brahma-bhuyaya kalpate). Therefore, brahmi sthiti is
liberation from material bondage.
Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura has summarized this Second Chapter of the
Bhagavad-gita as being the contents for the whole text. In the
Bhagavad-gita, the subject matters are karma-yoga, jnana-yoga, and
bhakti-yoga. In the Second Chapter karma-yoga and jnana-yoga have been
clearly discussed, and a glimpse of bhakti-yoga has also been given, as
the contents for the complete text.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Second Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of its Contents.

Chapter 3
Karma-yoga

TEXT 1

arjuna uvaca
jyayasi cet karmanas te
mata buddhir janardana
tat kim karmani ghore mam
niyojayasi kesava

SYNONYMS

arjunah--Arjuna; uvaca--said; jyayasi--speaking very highly; cet--
although; karmanah--than fruitive action; te--Your; mata--opinion;
buddhih--intelligence; janardana--O Krsna; tat--therefore; kim--why;
karmani--in action; ghore--ghastly; mam--me; niyojayasi--engaging me;
kesava--O Krsna.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: O Janardana, O Kesava, why do You urge me to engage in
this ghastly warfare, if You think that intelligence is better than
fruitive work?

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead Sri Krsna has very elaborately
described the constitution of the soul in the previous chapter, with a



view to deliver His intimate friend Arjuna from the ocean of material
grief. And the path of realization has been recommended: buddhi-yoga,
or Krsna consciousness. Sometimes Krsna consciousness is misunderstood
to be inertia, and one with such a misunderstanding often withdraws to
a secluded place to become fully Krsna conscious by chanting the holy
name of Lord Krsna. But without being trained in the philosophy of
Krsna consciousness, it is not advisable to chant the holy name of
Krsna in a secluded place, where one may acquire only cheap adoration
from the innocent public. Arjuna also thought of Krsna consciousness or
buddhi-yoga, or intelligence in spiritual advancement of knowledge, as
something like retirement from active life and the practice of penance
and austerity at a secluded place. In other words, he wanted to
skillfully avoid the fighting by using Krsna consciousness as an
excuse. But as a sincere student, he placed the matter before his
master and questioned Krsna as to his best course of action. In answer,
Lord Krsna elaborately explained karma-yoga, or work in Krsna
consciousness, in this Third Chapter.

TEXT 2

vyamisreneva vakyena
buddhim mohayasiva me
tad ekam vada niscitya
yena sreyo 'ham apnuyam

SYNONYMS

vyamisrena--by equivocal; iva--as; vakyena--words; buddhim--
intelligence; mohayasi--bewildering; iva--as; me--my; tat--therefore;
ekam--only one; vada--please tell; niscitya--ascertaining; yena--by
which; sreyah--real benefit; aham--I; apnuyam--may have it.

TRANSLATION

My intelligence is bewildered by Your equivocal instructions.
Therefore, please tell me decisively what is most beneficial for me.

PURPORT

In the previous chapter, as a prelude to the Bhagavad-gita, many
different paths were explained, such as sankhya-yoga, buddhi-yoga,
control of the senses by intelligence, work without fruitive desire,
and the position of the neophyte. This was all presented
unsystematically. A more organized outline of the path would be
necessary for action and understanding. Arjuna, therefore, wanted to
clear up these apparently confusing matters so that any common man
could accept them without misinterpretation. Although Krsna had no
intention of confusing Arjuna by any jugglery of words, Arjuna could
not follow the process of Krsna consciousness--either by inertia or
active service. In other words, by his questions he is clearing the
path of Krsna consciousness for all students who seriously want to
understand the mystery of the Bhagavad-gita.

TEXT 3

sri-bhagavan uvaca
loke 'smin dvi-vidha nistha
pura prokta mayanagha



jnana-yogena sankhyanam
karma-yogena yoginam

SYNONYMS

sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; loke--in
the world; asmin--this; dvi-vidha--two kinds of; nistha--faith; pura--
formerly; prokta--were said; maya--by Me; anagha--O sinless one; jnana-
yogena--by the linking process of knowledge; sankhyanam--of the empiric
philosophers; karma-yogena--by the linking process of devotion;
yoginam--of the devotees.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O sinless Arjuna, I have
already explained that there are two classes of men who try to realize
the self. Some are inclined to understand Him by empirical,
philosophical speculation, and others are inclined to know Him by
devotional work.

PURPORT

In the Second Chapter, verse 39, the Lord explained two kinds of
procedures--namely sankhya-yoga and karma-yoga, or buddhi-yoga. In this
verse, the Lord explains the same more clearly. Sankhya-yoga, or the
analytical study of the nature of spirit and matter, is the subject
matter for persons who are inclined to speculate and understand things
by experimental knowledge and philosophy. The other class of men work
in Krsna consciousness, as it is explained in the 61st verse of the
Second Chapter. The Lord has explained, also in the 39th verse, that by
working by the principles of buddhi-yoga, or Krsna consciousness, one
can be relieved from the bonds of action; and, furthermore, there is no
flaw in the process. The same principle is more clearly explained in
the 61st verse--that this buddhi-yoga is to depend entirely on the
Supreme (or more specifically, on Krsna), and in this way all the
senses can be brought under control very easily. Therefore, both the
yogas are interdependent, as religion and philosophy. Religion without
philosophy is sentiment, or sometimes fanaticism, while philosophy
without religion is mental speculation. The ultimate goal is Krsna,
because the philosophers who are also sincerely searching after the
Absolute Truth come in the end to Krsna consciousness. This is also
stated in the Bhagavad-gita. The whole process is to understand the
real position of the self in relation to the Superself. The indirect
process is philosophical speculation, by which, gradually, one may come
to the point of Krsna consciousness; and the other process is directly
connecting with everything in Krsna consciousness. Of these two, the
path of Krsna consciousness is better because it does not depend on
purifying the senses by a philosophical process. Krsna consciousness is
itself the purifying process, and by the direct method of devotional
service it is simultaneously easy and sublime.

TEXT 4

na karmanam anarambhan
naiskarmyam puruso 'snute
na ca sannyasanad eva
siddhim samadhigacchati



SYNONYMS

na--without; karmanam--of the prescribed duties; anarambhat--
nonperformance; naiskarmyam--freedom from reaction; purusah--man;
asnute--achieve; na--nor; ca--also; sannyasanat--by renunciation; eva--
simply; siddhim--success; samadhigacchati--attain.

TRANSLATION

Not by merely abstaining from work can one achieve freedom from
reaction, nor by renunciation alone can one attain perfection.

PURPORT

The renounced order of life can be accepted upon being purified by the
discharge of the prescribed form of duties which are laid down just to
purify the hearts of materialistic men. Without purification, one
cannot attain success by abruptly adopting the fourth order of life
(sannyasa). According to the empirical philosophers, simply by adopting
sannyasa, or retiring from fruitive activities, one at once becomes as
good as Narayana. But Lord Krsna does not approve this principle.
Without purification of heart, sannyasa is simply a disturbance to the
social order. On the other hand, if someone takes to the transcendental
service of the Lord, even without discharging his prescribed duties,
whatever he may be able to advance in the cause is accepted by the Lord
(buddhi-yoga). Sv-alpam apy asya dharmasya trayate mahato bhayat. Even
a slight performance of such a principle enables one to overcome great
difficulties.

TEXT 5

na hi kascit ksanam api
jatu tisthaty akarma-krt
karyate hy avasah karma
sarvah prakrti-jair gunaih

SYNONYMS

na--nor; hi--certainly; kascit--anyone; ksanam--even a moment; api--
also; jatu--even; tisthati--stands; akarma-krt--without doing
something; karyate--forced to work; hi--certainly; avasah--helplessly;
karma--work; sarvah--everything; prakrti-jaih--out of the modes of
material nature; gunaih--by the qualities.

TRANSLATION

All men are forced to act helplessly according to the impulses born of
the modes of material nature; therefore no one can refrain from doing
something, not even for a moment.

PURPORT

It is not a question of embodied life, but it is the nature of the soul
to be always active. Without the presence of the spirit soul, the
material body cannot move. The body is only a dead vehicle to be worked
by the spirit soul, which is always active and cannot stop even for a
moment. As such, the spirit soul has to be engaged in the good work of
Krsna consciousness, otherwise it will be engaged in occupations



dictated by illusory energy. In contact with material energy, the
spirit soul acquires material modes, and to purify the soul from such
affinities it is necessary to engage in the prescribed duties enjoined
in the sastras. But if the soul is engaged in his natural function of
Krsna consciousness, whatever he is able to do is good for him. The
Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.5.17) affirms this:

tyaktva sva-dharmam caranambujam harer
bhajann apakvo 'tha patet tato yadi
yatra kva vabhadram abhud amusya kim
ko vartha apto 'bhajatam sva-dharmatah

"If someone takes to Krsna consciousness, even though he may not follow
the prescribed duties in the sastras nor execute the devotional service
properly, and even though he may fall down from the standard, there is
no loss or evil for him. But if he carries out all the injunctions for
purification in the sastras, what does it avail him if he is not Krsna
conscious?" So the purificatory process is necessary for reaching this
point of Krsna consciousness. Therefore, sannyasa, or any purificatory
process, is to help reach the ultimate goal of becoming Krsna
conscious, without which everything is considered a failure.

TEXT 6

karmendriyani samyamya
ya aste manasa smaran
indriyarthan vimudhatma
mithyacarah sa ucyate

SYNONYMS

karma-indriyani--the five working sense organs; samyamya--controlling;
yah--anyone who; aste--remains; manasa--by mind; smaran--thinking;
indriya-arthan--sense objects; vimudha--foolish; atma--soul; mithya-
acarah--pretender; sah--he; ucyate--is called.

TRANSLATION

One who restrains the senses and organs of action, but whose mind
dwells on sense objects, certainly deludes himself and is called a
pretender.

PURPORT

There are many pretenders who refuse to work in Krsna consciousness but
make a show of meditation, while actually dwelling within the mind upon
sense enjoyment. Such pretenders may also speak on dry philosophy in
order to bluff sophisticated followers, but according to this verse
these are the greatest cheaters. For sense enjoyment one can act in any
capacity of the social order, but if one follows the rules and
regulations of his particular status, he can make gradual progress in
purifying his existence. But he who makes a show of being a yogi, while
actually searching for the objects of sense gratification, must be
called the greatest cheater, even though he sometimes speaks of
philosophy. His knowledge has no value because the effects of such a
sinful man's knowledge are taken away by the illusory energy of the



Lord. Such a pretender's mind is always impure, and therefore his show
of yogic meditation has no value whatsoever.

TEXT 7

yas tv indriyani manasa
niyamyarabhate 'rjuna
karmendriyaih karma-yogam
asaktah sa visisyate

SYNONYMS

yah--one who; tu--but; indriyani--senses; manasa--by the mind; niyamya-
-regulating; arabhate--begins; arjuna--O Arjuna; karma-indriyaih--by
the active sense organs; karma-yogam--devotion; asaktah--without
attachment; sah--he; visisyate--by far the better.

TRANSLATION

On the other hand, he who controls the senses by the mind and engages
his active organs in works of devotion, without attachment, is by far
superior.

PURPORT

Instead of becoming a pseudo-transcendentalist for the sake of wanton
living and sense enjoyment, it is far better to remain in one's own
business and execute the purpose of life, which is to get free from
material bondage and enter into the kingdom of God. The prime svartha-
gati, or goal of self-interest, is to reach Visnu. The whole
institution of varna and asrama is designed to help us reach this goal
of life. A householder can also reach this destination by regulated
service in Krsna consciousness. For self-realization, one can live a
controlled life, as prescribed in the sastras, and continue carrying
out his business without attachment, and in that way make progress.
Such a sincere person who follows this method is far better situated
than the false pretender who adopts show-bottle spiritualism to cheat
the innocent public. A sincere sweeper in the street is far better than
the charlatan meditator who meditates only for the sake of making a
living.

TEXT 8

niyatam kuru karma tvam
karma jyayo hy akarmanah
sarira-yatrapi ca te
na prasiddhyed akarmanah

SYNONYMS

niyatam--prescribed; kuru--do; karma--duties; tvam--you; karma--work;
jyayah--better; hi--than; akarmanah--without work; sarira--bodily;
yatra--maintenance; api--even; ca--also; te--your; na--never;
prasiddhyet--effected; akarmanah--without work.

TRANSLATION



Perform your prescribed duty, for action is better than inaction. A man
cannot even maintain his physical body without work.

PURPORT

There are many pseudo-meditators who misrepresent themselves as
belonging to high parentage, and great professional men who falsely
pose that they have sacrificed everything for the sake of advancement
in spiritual life. Lord Krsna did not want Arjuna to become a
pretender, but that he perform his prescribed duties as set forth for
ksatriyas. Arjuna was a householder and a military general, and
therefore it was better for him to remain as such and perform his
religious duties as prescribed for the householder ksatriya. Such
activities gradually cleanse the heart of a mundane man and free him
from material contamination. So-called renunciation for the purpose of
maintenance is never approved by the Lord, nor by any religious
scripture. After all, one has to maintain one's body and soul together
by some work. Work should not be given up capriciously, without
purification of materialistic propensities. Anyone who is in the
material world is certainly possessed of the impure propensity for
lording it over material nature, or, in other words, for sense
gratification. Such polluted propensities have to be cleared. Without
doing so, through prescribed duties, one should never attempt to become
a so-called transcendentalist, renouncing work and living at the cost
of others.

TEXT 9

yajnarthat karmano 'nyatra
loko 'yam karma-bandhanah
tad-artham karma kaunteya
mukta-sangah samacara

SYNONYMS

yajna-arthat--only for the sake of Yajna, or Visnu; karmanah--work
done; anyatra--otherwise; lokah--this world; ayam--this; karma-
bandhanah--bondage by work; tat--Him; artham--for the sake; karma--
work; kaunteya--O son of Kunti; mukta-sangah--liberated from
association; samacara--do perfectly.

TRANSLATION

Work done as a sacrifice for Visnu has to be performed, otherwise work
binds one to this material world. Therefore, O son of Kunti, perform
your prescribed duties for His satisfaction, and in that way you will
always remain unattached and free from bondage.

PURPORT

Since one has to work even for the simple maintenance of the body, the
prescribed duties for a particular social position and quality are so
made that that purpose can be fulfilled. Yajna means Lord Visnu, or
sacrificial performances. All sacrificial performances also are meant
for the satisfaction of Lord Visnu. The Vedas enjoin: yajno vai visnuh.
In other words, the same purpose is served whether one performs
prescribed yajnas or directly serves Lord Visnu. Krsna consciousness is
therefore performance of yajna as it is prescribed in this verse. The



varnasrama institution also aims at this for satisfying Lord Visnu.
Varnasramacaravata purusena parah puman. visnur aradhyate (Visnu Purana
3.8.8). Therefore one has to work for the satisfaction of Visnu. Any
other work done in this material world will be a cause of bondage, for
both good and evil work have their reactions, and any reaction binds
the performer. Therefore, one has to work in Krsna consciousness to
satisfy Krsna (or Visnu); and while performing such activities one is
in a liberated stage. This is the great art of doing work, and in the
beginning this process requires very expert guidance. One should
therefore act very diligently, under the expert guidance of a devotee
of Lord Krsna, or under the direct instruction of Lord Krsna Himself
(under whom Arjuna had the opportunity to work). Nothing should be
performed for sense gratification, but everything should be done for
the satisfaction of Krsna. This practice will not only save one from
the reaction of work, but will also gradually elevate one to
transcendental loving service of the Lord, which alone can raise one to
the kingdom of God.

TEXT 10

saha-yajnah prajah srstva
purovaca prajapatih
anena prasavisyadhvam
esa vo 'stv ista-kama-dhuk

SYNONYMS

saha--along with; yajnah--sacrifices; prajah--generations; srstva--
creating; pura--anciently; uvaca--said; praja-patih--the Lord of
creatures; anena--by this; prasavisyadhvam--be more and more
prosperous; esah--certainly; vah--your; astu--let it be; ista--all
desirable; kama-dhuk--bestower.

TRANSLATION

In the beginning of creation, the Lord of all creatures sent forth
generations of men and demigods, along with sacrifices for Visnu, and
blessed them by saying, "Be thou happy by this yajna [sacrifice]
because its performance will bestow upon you all desirable things."

PURPORT

The material creation by the Lord of creatures (Visnu) is a chance
offered to the conditioned souls to come back home--back to Godhead.
All living entities within the material creation are conditioned by
material nature because of their forgetfulness of their relationship to
Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Vedic principles are to
help us understand this eternal relation, as it is stated in the
Bhagavad-gita: vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyah. The Lord says that
the purpose of the Vedas is to understand Him. In the Vedic hymns it is
said: patim visvasyatmesvaram. Therefore, the Lord of the living
entities is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu. In the Srimad-
Bhagavatam also (2.4.20) Srila Sukadeva Gosvami describes the Lord as
pati in so many ways:

sriyah patir yajna-patih praja-patir
dhiyam patir loka-patir dhara-patih
patir gatis candhaka-vrsni-satvatam



prasidatam me bhagavan satam patih

The praja-pati is Lord Visnu, and He is the Lord of all living
creatures, all worlds, and all beauties, and the protector of everyone.
The Lord created this material world for the conditioned souls to learn
how to perform yajnas (sacrifices) for the satisfaction of Visnu, so
that while in the material world they can live very comfortably without
anxiety and after finishing the present material body, they can enter
into the kingdom of God. That is the whole program for the conditioned
soul. By performance of yajna, the conditioned souls gradually become
Krsna conscious and become godly in all respects. In the Age of Kali,
the sankirtana-yajna (the chanting of the names of God) is recommended
by the Vedic scriptures, and this transcendental system was introduced
by Lord Caitanya for the deliverance of all men in this age.
Sankirtana-yajna and Krsna consciousness go well together. Lord Krsna
in His devotional form (as Lord Caitanya) is mentioned in the Srimad-
Bhagavatam (11.5.32) as follows, with special reference to the
sankirtana-yajna:

krsna-varnam tvisakrsnam
sangopangastra-parsadam
yajnaih sankirtana-prayair
yajanti hi su-medhasah

"In this Age of Kali, people who are endowed with sufficient
intelligence will worship the Lord, who is accompanied by His
associates, by performance of sankirtana-yajna." Other yajnas
prescribed in the Vedic literatures are not easy to perform in this Age
of Kali, but the sankirtana-yajna is easy and sublime for all purposes.

TEXT 11

devan bhavayatanena
te deva bhavayantu vah
parasparam bhavayantah
sreyah param avapsyatha

SYNONYMS

devan--demigods; bhavayata--having pleased; anena--by this sacrifice;
te--those; devah--the demigods; bhavayantu--will please; vah--you;
parasparam--mutual; bhavayantah--pleasing one another; sreyah--
benediction; param--the supreme; avapsyatha--do you achieve.

TRANSLATION

The demigods, being pleased by sacrifices, will also please you; thus
nourishing one another, there will reign general prosperity for all.

PURPORT

The demigods are empowered administrators of material affairs. The
supply of air, light, water and all other benedictions for maintaining
the body and soul of every living entity are entrusted to the demigods,
who are innumerable assistants in different parts of the body of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Their pleasures and displeasures are
dependent on the performance of yajnas by the human being. Some of the
yajnas are meant to satisfy particular demigods; but even in so doing,



Lord Visnu is worshiped in all yajnas as the chief beneficiary. It is
stated also in the Bhagavad-gita that Krsna Himself is the beneficiary
of all kinds of yajnas: bhoktaram yajna-tapasam. Therefore, ultimate
satisfaction of the yajna-pati is the chief purpose of all yajnas. When
these yajnas are perfectly performed, naturally the demigods in charge
of the different departments of supply are pleased, and there is no
scarcity in the supply of natural products.
Performance of yajnas has many side benefits, ultimately leading to
liberation from the material bondage. By performance of yajnas, all
activities become purified, as it is stated in the Vedas:

ahara-suddhau sattva-suddhih sattva-suddhau
dhruva smrtih smrti-lambhe sarvagranthinam vipramoksah

As it will be explained in the following verses, by performance of
yajna one's eatables become sanctified, and by eating sanctified
foodstuffs one's very existence becomes purified; by the purification
of existence, finer tissues in memory become sanctified, and when
memory is sanctified, one can think of the path of liberation, and all
these combined together lead to Krsna consciousness, the great
necessity of present-day society.

TEXT 12

istan bhogan hi vo deva
dasyante yajna-bhavitah
tair dattan apradayaibhyo
yo bhunkte stena eva sah

SYNONYMS

istan--desired; bhogan--necessities of life; hi--certainly; vah--unto
you; devah--the demigods; dasyante--award; yajna-bhavitah--being
satisfied by the performance of sacrifices; taih--by them; dattan--
things given; apradaya--without offering; ebhyah--to the demigods; yah-
-he who; bhunkte--enjoys; stenah--thief; eva--certainly; sah--is he.

TRANSLATION

In charge of the various necessities of life, the demigods, being
satisfied by the performance of yajna [sacrifice], supply all
necessities to man. But he who enjoys these gifts without offering them
to the demigods in return is certainly a thief.

PURPORT

The demigods are authorized supplying agents on behalf of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Visnu. Therefore, they must be satisfied by the
performance of prescribed yajnas. In the Vedas, there are different
kinds of yajnas prescribed for different kinds of demigods, but all are
ultimately offered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For one who
cannot understand what the Personality of Godhead is, sacrifice to the
demigods is recommended. According to the different material qualities
of the persons concerned, different types of yajnas are recommended in
the Vedas. Worship of different demigods is also on the same basis--
namely, according to different qualities. For example, the meat-eaters
are recommended to worship the goddess Kali, the ghastly form of
material nature, and before the goddess the sacrifice of animals is



recommended. But for those who are in the mode of goodness, the
transcendental worship of Visnu is recommended. But ultimately, all
yajnas are meant for gradual promotion to the transcendental position.
For ordinary men, at least five yajnas, known as panca-maha-yajna, are
necessary.
One should know, however, that all the necessities of life that the
human society requires are supplied by the demigod agents of the Lord.
No one can manufacture anything. Take, for example, all the eatables of
human society. These eatables include grains, fruits, vegetables, milk,
sugar, etc., for persons in the mode of goodness, and also eatables for
the non-vegetarians, like meats, etc., none of which can be
manufactured by men. Then again, take for example heat, light, water,
air, etc., which are also necessities of life--none of them can be
manufactured by the human society. Without the Supreme Lord, there can
be no profuse sunlight, moonlight, rainfall, breeze, etc., without
which no one can live. Obviously, our life is dependent on supplies
from the Lord. Even for our manufacturing enterprises, we require so
many raw materials like metal, sulphur, mercury, manganese, and so many
essentials--all of which are supplied by the agents of the Lord, with
the purpose that we should make proper use of them to keep ourselves
fit and healthy for the purpose of self-realization, leading to the
ultimate goal of life, namely, liberation from the material struggle
for existence. This aim of life is attained by performance of yajnas.
If we forget the purpose of human life and simply take supplies from
the agents of the Lord for sense gratification and become more and more
entangled in material existence, which is not the purpose of creation,
certainly we become thieves, and therefore we are punished by the laws
of material nature. A society of thieves can never be happy because
they have no aim in life. The gross materialist thieves have no
ultimate goal of life. They are simply directed to sense gratification;
nor do they have knowledge of how to perform yajnas. Lord Caitanya,
however, inaugurated the easiest performance of yajna, namely the
sankirtana-yajna, which can be performed by anyone in the world who
accepts the principles of Krsna consciousness.

TEXT 13

yajna-sistasinah santo
mucyante sarva-kilbisaih
bhunjate te tv agham papa
ye pacanty atma-karanat

SYNONYMS

yajna-sista--food taken after performance of yajna; asinah--eaters;
santah--the devotees; mucyante--get relief from; sarva--all kinds of;
kilbisaih--from sins; bhunjate--enjoy; te--they; tu--but; agham--
grievous sins; papah--sinners; ye--those; pacanti--prepare food; atma-
karanat--for sense enjoyment.

TRANSLATION

The devotees of the Lord are released from all kinds of sins because
they eat food which is offered first for sacrifice. Others, who prepare
food for personal sense enjoyment, verily eat only sin.

PURPORT



The devotees of the Supreme Lord, or the persons who are in Krsna
consciousness, are called santas, and they are always in love with the
Lord as it is described in the Brahma-samhita (5.38): premanjana-
cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santah sadaiva hrdayesu vilokayanti. The
santas, being always in a compact of love with the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Govinda (the giver of all pleasures), or Mukunda (the giver
of liberation), or Krsna (the all-attractive person), cannot accept
anything without first offering it to the Supreme Person. Therefore,
such devotees always perform yajnas in different modes of devotional
service, such as sravanam, kirtanam, smaranam, arcanam, etc., and these
performances of yajnas keep them always aloof from all kinds of
contamination of sinful association in the material world. Others, who
prepare food for self or sense gratification, are not only thieves, but
are also the eaters of all kinds of sins. How can a person be happy if
he is both a thief and sinful? It is not possible. Therefore, in order
for people to become happy in all respects, they must be taught to
perform the easy process of sankirtana-yajna, in full Krsna
consciousness. Otherwise, there can be no peace or happiness in the
world.

TEXT 14

annad bhavanti bhutani
parjanyad anna-sambhavah
yajnad bhavati parjanyo
yajnah karma-samudbhavah

SYNONYMS

annat--from grains; bhavanti--grow; bhutani--the material bodies;
parjanyat--from rains; anna--of food grains; sambhavah--are made
possible; yajnat--from the performance of sacrifice; bhavati--becomes
possible; parjanyah--rains; yajnah--performance of yajna; karma--
prescribed duties; samudbhavah--born of.

TRANSLATION

All living bodies subsist on food grains, which are produced from
rains. Rains are produced by performance of yajna [sacrifice], and
yajna is born of prescribed duties.

PURPORT

Srila Baladeva Vidyabhusana, a great commentator on the Bhagavad-gita,
writes as follows: ye indrady-angatayavasthitam yajnam sarvesvaram
visnum abhyarcya tac-chesam asnanti tena tad deha-yatram sampadayanti,
te santah sarvesvarasya yajna-purusasya bhaktah sarva-kilbisair anadi-
kala-vivrddhair atmanubhava-prati bandhakair nikhilaih papair
vimucyante. The Supreme Lord, who is known as the yajna-purusa, or the
personal beneficiary of all sacrifices, is the master of all demigods,
who serve Him as the different limbs of the body serve the whole.
Demigods like Indra, Candra, Varuna, etc., are appointed officers who
manage material affairs, and the Vedas direct sacrifices to satisfy
these demigods so that they may be pleased to supply air, light and
water sufficiently to produce food grains. When Lord Krsna is
worshiped, the demigods, who are different limbs of the Lord, are also
automatically worshiped; therefore there is no separate need to worship
the demigods. For this reason, the devotees of the Lord, who are in



Krsna consciousness, offer food to Krsna and then eat--a process which
nourishes the body spiritually. By such action not only are past sinful
reactions in the body vanquished, but the body becomes immunized to all
contamination of material nature. When there is an epidemic disease, an
antiseptic vaccine protects a person from the attack of such an
epidemic. Similarly, food offered to Lord Visnu and then taken by us
makes us sufficiently resistant to material affection, and one who is
accustomed to this practice is called a devotee of the Lord. Therefore,
a person in Krsna consciousness, who eats only food offered to Krsna,
can counteract all reactions of past material infections, which are
impediments to the progress of self-realization. On the other hand, one
who does not do so continues to increase the volume of sinful action,
and this prepares the next body to resemble hogs and dogs, to suffer
the resultant reactions of all sins. The material world is full of
contaminations, and one who is immunized by accepting prasadam of the
Lord (food offered to Visnu) is saved from the attack, whereas one who
does not do so becomes subjected to contamination.
Food grains or vegetables are factually eatables. The human being eats
different kinds of food grains, vegetables, fruits, etc., and the
animals eat the refuse of the food grains and vegetables, grass,
plants, etc. Human beings who are accustomed to eating meat and flesh
must also depend on the production of vegetation in order to eat the
animals. Therefore, ultimately, we have to depend on the production of
the field and not on the production of big factories. The field
production is due to sufficient rain from the sky, and such rains are
controlled by demigods like Indra, sun, moon, etc., and they are all
servants of the Lord. The Lord can be satisfied by sacrifices;
therefore, one who cannot perform them will find himself in scarcity--
that is the law of nature. Yajna, specifically the sankirtana-yajna
prescribed for this age, must therefore be performed to save us at
least from scarcity of food supply.

TEXT 15

karma brahmodbhavam viddhi
brahmaksara-samudbhavam
tasmat sarva-gatam brahma
nityam yajne pratisthitam

SYNONYMS

karma--work; brahma--Vedas; udbhavam--produced from; viddhi--one should
know; brahma--the Vedas; aksara--the Supreme Brahman (Personality of
Godhead); samudbhavam--directly manifested; tasmat--therefore; sarva-
gatam--all-pervading; brahma--transcendence; nityam--eternally; yajne--
in sacrifice; pratisthitam--situated.

TRANSLATION

Regulated activities are prescribed in the Vedas, and the Vedas are
directly manifested from the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Consequently the all-pervading Transcendence is eternally situated in
acts of sacrifice.

PURPORT

Yajnartha-karma, or the necessity of work for the satisfaction of Krsna
only, is more expressly stated in this verse. If we have to work for



the satisfaction of the yajna-purusa, Visnu, then we must find out the
direction of work in Brahman, or the transcendental Vedas. The Vedas
are therefore codes of working directions. Anything performed without
the direction of the Vedas is called vikarma, or unauthorized or sinful
work. Therefore, one should always take direction from the Vedas to be
saved from the reaction of work. As one has to work in ordinary life by
the direction of the state, similarly, one has to work under the
direction of the supreme state of the Lord. Such directions in the
Vedas are directly manifested from the breathing of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. It is said: asya mahato bhutasya nisvasitam
etad yad rg-vedo yajur-vedah samavedo 'tharvangirasah. "The four Vedas-
-namely the Rg Veda, Yajur Veda, Sama Veda and Atharva Veda--are all
emanations from the breathing of the great Personality of Godhead."
(Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 4.5.11) The Lord, being omnipotent, can speak
by breathing air, as it is confirmed in the Brahma-samhita, for the
Lord has the omnipotence to perform through each of His senses the
actions of all other senses. In other words, the Lord can speak through
His breathing, and He can impregnate by His eyes. In fact, it is said
that He glanced over material nature and thus fathered all living
entities. After creating or impregnating the conditioned souls in the
womb of material nature, He gave His directions in the Vedic wisdom as
to how such conditioned souls can return home, back to Godhead. We
should always remember that the conditioned souls in material nature
are all eager for material enjoyment. But the Vedic directions are so
made that one can satisfy one's perverted desires, then return to
Godhead, having finished his so-called enjoyment. It is a chance for
the conditioned souls to attain liberation; therefore the conditioned
souls must try to follow the process of yajna by becoming Krsna
conscious. Even those who cannot follow the Vedic injunctions may adopt
the principles of Krsna consciousness, and that will take the place of
performance of Vedic yajnas, or karmas.

TEXT 16

evam pravartitam cakram
nanuvartayatiha yah
aghayur indriyaramo
mogham partha sa jivati

SYNONYMS

evam--thus prescribed; pravartitam--established by the Vedas; cakram--
cycle; na--does not; anuvartayati--adopt; iha--in this life; yah--one
who; agha-ayuh--life full of sins; indriya-aramah--satisfied in sense
gratification; mogham--useless; partha--O son of Prtha (Arjuna); sah--
one who does so; jivati--lives.

TRANSLATION

My dear Arjuna, a man who does not follow this prescribed Vedic system
of sacrifice certainly leads a life full of sin, for a person
delighting only in the senses lives in vain.

PURPORT

The mammonist philosophy of work very hard and enjoy sense
gratification is condemned herein by the Lord. Therefore, for those who
want to enjoy this material world, the above-mentioned cycle of



performing yajnas is absolutely necessary. One who does not follow such
regulations is living a very risky life, being condemned more and more.
By nature's law, this human form of life is specifically meant for
self-realization, in either of the three ways--namely karma-yoga,
jnana-yoga or bhakti-yoga. There is no necessity of rigidly following
the performances of the prescribed yajnas for the transcendentalists
who are above vice and virtue; but those who are engaged in sense
gratification require purification by the above-mentioned cycle of
yajna performances. There are different kinds of activities. Those who
are not Krsna conscious are certainly engaged in sensory consciousness;
therefore they need to execute pious work. The yajna system is planned
in such a way that sensory conscious persons may satisfy their desires
without becoming entangled in the reactions of sense-gratificatory
work. The prosperity of the world depends not on our own efforts but on
the background arrangement of the Supreme Lord, directly carried out by
the demigods. Therefore, the yajnas are directly aimed at the
particular demigod mentioned in the Vedas. Indirectly, it is the
practice of Krsna consciousness, because when one masters the
performance of yajnas, one is sure to become Krsna conscious. But if by
performing yajnas one does not become Krsna conscious, such principles
are counted as only moral codes. One should not, therefore, limit his
progress only to the point of moral codes, but should transcend them,
to attain Krsna consciousness.

TEXT 17

yas tv atma-ratir eva syad
atma-trptas ca manavah
atmany eva ca santustas
tasya karyam na vidyate

SYNONYMS

yah--one who; tu--but; atma-ratih--takes pleasure; eva--certainly;
syat--remains; atma-trptah--self-illuminated; ca--and; manavah--a man;
atmani--in himself; eva--only; ca--and; santustah--perfectly satiated;
tasya--his; karyam--duty; na--does not; vidyate--exist.

TRANSLATION

One who is, however, taking pleasure in the self, who is illuminated in
the self, who rejoices in and is satisfied with the self only, fully
satiated--for him there is no duty.

PURPORT

A person who is fully Krsna conscious, and is fully satisfied by his
acts in Krsna consciousness, no longer has any duty to perform. Due to
his being Krsna conscious, all impiety within is instantly cleansed, an
effect of many, many thousands of yajna performances. By such clearing
of consciousness, one becomes fully confident of his eternal position
in relationship with the Supreme. His duty thus becomes self-
illuminated by the grace of the Lord, and therefore he no longer has
any obligations to the Vedic injunctions. Such a Krsna conscious person
is no longer interested in material activities and no longer takes
pleasure in material arrangements like wine, women and similar
infatuations.



TEXT 18

naiva tasya krtenartho
nakrteneha kascana
na casya sarva-bhutesu
kascid artha-vyapasrayah

SYNONYMS

na--never; eva--certainly; tasya--his; krtena--by discharge of duty;
arthah--purpose; na--nor; akrtena--without discharge of duty; iha--in
this world; kascana--whatever; na--never; ca--and; asya--of him; sarva-
bhutesu--in all living beings; kascit--any; artha--purpose;
vyapasrayah--taking shelter of.

TRANSLATION

A self-realized man has no purpose to fulfill in the discharge of his
prescribed duties, nor has he any reason not to perform such work. Nor
has he any need to depend on any other living being.

PURPORT

A self-realized man is no longer obliged to perform any prescribed
duty, save and except activities in Krsna consciousness. Krsna
consciousness is not inactivity either, as will be explained in the
following verses. A Krsna conscious man does not take shelter of any
person--man or demigod. Whatever he does in Krsna consciousness is
sufficient in the discharge of his obligation.

TEXT 19

tasmad asaktah satatam
karyam karma samacara
asakto hy acaran karma
param apnoti purusah

SYNONYMS

tasmat--therefore; asaktah--without attachment; satatam--constantly;
karyam--as duty; karma--work; samacara--perform; asaktah--nonattached;
hi--certainly; acaran--performing; karma--work; param--the Supreme;
apnoti--achieves; purusah--a man.

TRANSLATION

Therefore, without being attached to the fruits of activities, one
should act as a matter of duty; for by working without attachment one
attains the Supreme.

PURPORT

The Supreme is the Personality of Godhead for the devotees, and
liberation for the impersonalist. A person, therefore, acting for
Krsna, or in Krsna consciousness, under proper guidance and without
attachment to the result of the work, is certainly making progress
toward the supreme goal of life. Arjuna is told that he should fight in
the Battle of Kuruksetra for the interest of Krsna because Krsna wanted



him to fight. To be a good man or a nonviolent man is a personal
attachment, but to act on behalf of the Supreme is to act without
attachment for the result. That is perfect action of the highest
degree, recommended by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna.
Vedic rituals, like prescribed sacrifices, are performed for
purification of impious activities that were performed in the field of
sense gratification. But action in Krsna consciousness is
transcendental to the reactions of good or evil work. A Krsna conscious
person has no attachment for the result but acts on behalf of Krsna
alone. He engages in all kinds of activities, but is completely
nonattached.

TEXT 20

karmanaiva hi samsiddhim
asthita janakadayah
loka-sangraham evapi
sampasyan kartum arhasi

SYNONYMS

karmana--by work; eva--even; hi--certainly; samsiddhim--perfection;
asthitah--situated; janaka-adayah--Janaka and other kings; loka-
sangraham--educating the people in general; eva--also; api--for the
sake of; sampasyan--by considering; kartum--to act; arhasi--deserve.

TRANSLATION

Kings such as Janaka and others attained the perfectional stage by
performance of prescribed duties. Therefore, just for the sake of
educating the people in general, you should perform your work.

PURPORT

Kings like Janaka and others were all self-realized souls; consequently
they had no obligation to perform the prescribed duties in the Vedas.
Nonetheless they performed all prescribed activities just to set
examples for the people in general. Janaka was the father of Sita and
father-in-law of Lord Sri Rama. Being a great devotee of the Lord, he
was transcendentally situated, but because he was the king of Mithila
(a subdivision of Bihar province in India), he had to teach his
subjects how to fight righteously in battle. He and his subjects fought
to teach people in general that violence is also necessary in a
situation where good arguments fail. Before the Battle of Kuruksetra,
every effort was made to avoid the war, even by the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, but the other party was determined to fight. So for such a
right cause, there is a necessity for fighting. Although one who is
situated in Krsna consciousness may not have any interest in the world,
he still works to teach the public how to live and how to act.
Experienced persons in Krsna consciousness can act in such a way that
others will follow, and this is explained in the following verse.

TEXT 21

yad yad acarati sresthas
tat tad evetaro janah
sa yat pramanam kurute
lokas tad anuvartate



SYNONYMS

yat--whatever; yat--and whichever; acarati--does he act; sresthah--a
respectable leader; tat--that; tat--and that alone; eva--certainly;
itarah--common; janah--person; sah--he; yat--whichever; pramanam--
evidence; kurute--does perform; lokah--all the world; tat--that;
anuvartate--follow in the footsteps.

TRANSLATION

Whatever action is performed by a great man, common men follow in his
footsteps. And whatever standards he sets by exemplary acts, all the
world pursues.

PURPORT

People in general always require a leader who can teach the public by
practical behavior. A leader cannot teach the public to stop smoking if
he himself smokes. Lord Caitanya said that a teacher should behave
properly even before he begins teaching. One who teaches in that way is
called acarya, or the ideal teacher. Therefore, a teacher must follow
the principles of sastra (scripture) to reach the common man. The
teacher cannot manufacture rules against the principles of revealed
scriptures. The revealed scriptures, like Manu-samhita and similar
others, are considered the standard books to be followed by human
society. Thus the leader's teaching should be based on the principles
of such standard rules as they are practiced by the great teachers. The
Srimad-Bhagavatam also affirms that one should follow in the footsteps
of great devotees, and that is the way of progress on the path of
spiritual realization. The king or the executive head of a state, the
father and the school teacher are all considered to be natural leaders
of the innocent people in general. All such natural leaders have a
great responsibility to their dependents; therefore they must be
conversant with standard books of moral and spiritual codes.

TEXT 22

na me parthasti kartavyam
trisu lokesu kincana
nanavaptam avaptavyam
varta eva ca karmani

SYNONYMS

na--not; me--Mine; partha--O son of Prtha; asti--there is; kartavyam--
any prescribed duty; trisu--in the three; lokesu--planetary systems;
kincana--anything; na--no; anavaptam--in want; avaptavyam--to be
gained; varte--engaged; eva--certainly; ca--also; karmani--in one's
prescribed duty.

TRANSLATION

O son of Prtha, there is no work prescribed for Me within all the three
planetary systems. Nor am I in want of anything, nor have I need to
obtain anything--and yet I am engaged in work.

PURPORT



The Supreme Personality of Godhead is described in the Vedic
literatures as follows:

tam isvaranam paramam mahesvaram
tam devatanam paramam ca daivatam
patim patinam paramam parastad
vidama devam bhuvanesam idyam

na tasya karyam karanam ca vidyate
na tat-samas cabhyadhikas ca drsyate
parasya saktir vividhaiva sruyate
svabhaviki jnana-bala-kriya ca

"The Supreme Lord is the controller of all other controllers, and He is
the greatest of all the diverse planetary leaders. Everyone is under
His control. All entities are delegated with particular power only by
the Supreme Lord; they are not supreme themselves. He is also
worshipable by all demigods and is the supreme director of all
directors. Therefore, He is transcendental to all kinds of material
leaders and controllers and is worshipable by all. There is no one
greater than Him, and He is the supreme cause of all causes.
"He does not possess bodily form like that of an ordinary living
entity. There is no difference between His body and His soul. He is
absolute. All His senses are transcendental. Any one of His senses can
perform the action of any other sense. Therefore no one is greater than
Him or equal to Him. His potencies are multifarious, and thus His deeds
are automatically performed as a natural sequence." (Svetasvatara
Upanisad 6.7-8)
Since everything is in full opulence in the Personality of Godhead and
is existing in full truth, there is no duty for the Supreme Personality
of Godhead to perform. One who must receive the results of work has
some designated duty, but one who has nothing to achieve within the
three planetary systems certainly has no duty. And yet Lord Krsna is
engaged on the Battlefield of Kuruksetra as the leader of the ksatriyas
because the ksatriyas are duty-bound to give protection to the
distressed. Although He is above all the regulations of the revealed
scriptures, He does not do anything that violates the revealed
scriptures.

TEXT 23

yadi hy aham na varteyam
jatu karmany atandritah
mama vartmanuvartante
manusyah partha sarvasah

SYNONYMS

yadi--if; hi--certainly; aham--I; na--do not; varteyam--thus engage;
jatu--ever; karmani--in the performance of prescribed duties;
atandritah--with great care; mama--My; vartma--path; anuvartante--would
follow; manusyah--all men; partha--O son of Prtha; sarvasah--in all
respects.

TRANSLATION



For if I did not engage in work, O Partha, certainly all men would
follow My path.

PURPORT

In order to keep the balance of social tranquillity for progress in
spiritual life, there are traditional family usages meant for every
civilized man. Although such rules and regulations are for the
conditioned souls and not Lord Krsna, because He descended to establish
the principles of religion, He followed the prescribed rules.
Otherwise, common men would follow in His footsteps, because He is the
greatest authority. From the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is understood that
Lord Krsna was performing all the religious duties at home and out of
home, as required of a householder.

TEXT 24

utsideyur ime loka
na kuryam karma ced aham
sankarasya ca karta syam
upahanyam imah prajah

SYNONYMS

utsideyuh--put into ruin; ime--all these; lokah--worlds; na--do not;
kuryam--perform; karma--prescribed duties; cet--if; aham--I;
sankarasya--of unwanted population; ca--and; karta--creator; syam--
shall be; upahanyam--destroy; imah--all these; prajah--living entities.

TRANSLATION

If I should cease to work, then all these worlds would be put to
ruination. I would also be the cause of creating unwanted population,
and I would thereby destroy the peace of all sentient beings.

PURPORT

Varna-sankara is unwanted population which disturbs the peace of the
general society. In order to check this social disturbance, there are
prescribed rules and regulations by which the population can
automatically become peaceful and organized for spiritual progress in
life. When Lord Krsna descends, naturally He deals with such rules and
regulations in order to maintain the prestige and necessity of such
important performances. The Lord is the father of all living entities,
and if the living entities are misguided, indirectly the responsibility
goes to the Lord. Therefore, whenever there is general disregard of
regulative principles, the Lord Himself descends and corrects the
society. We should, however, note carefully that although we have to
follow in the footsteps of the Lord, we still have to remember that we
cannot imitate Him. Following and imitating are not on the same level.
We cannot imitate the Lord by lifting Govardhana Hill, as the Lord did
in His childhood. It is impossible for any human being. We have to
follow His instructions, but we may not imitate Him at any time. The
Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.33.30-31) affirms:

naitat samacarej jatu
manasapi hy anisvarah
vinasyaty acaran maudhyad



yatha 'rudro 'bdhi-jam visam

isvaranam vacah satyam
tathaivacaritam kvacit
tesam yat sva-vaco-yuktam
buddhimams tat samacaret

"One should simply follow the instructions of the Lord and His
empowered servants. Their instructions are all good for us, and any
intelligent person will perform them as instructed. However, one should
guard against trying to imitate their actions. One should not try to
drink the ocean of poison in imitation of Lord Siva."
We should always consider the position of the isvaras, or those who can
actually control the movements of the sun and moon, as superior.
Without such power, one cannot imitate the isvaras, who are
superpowerful. Lord Siva drank poison to the extent of swallowing an
ocean, but if any common man tries to drink even a fragment of such
poison, he will be killed. There are many pseudo-devotees of Lord Siva
who want to indulge in smoking ganja (marijuana) and similar
intoxicating drugs, forgetting that by so imitating the acts of Lord
Siva they are calling death very near. Similarly, there are some
pseudo-devotees of Lord Krsna who prefer to imitate the Lord in His
rasa-lila, or dance of love, forgetting their inability to lift
Govardhana Hill. It is best, therefore, that one not try to imitate the
powerful, but simply follow their instructions; nor should one try to
occupy their posts without qualification. There are so many
"incarnations" of God without the power of the Supreme Godhead.

TEXT 25

saktah karmany avidvamso
yatha kurvanti bharata
kuryad vidvams tathasaktas
cikirsur loka-sangraham

SYNONYMS

saktah--being attached; karmani--prescribed duties; avidvamsah--the
ignorant; yatha--as much as; kurvanti--do it; bharata--O descendant of
Bharata; kuryat--must do; vidvan--the learned; tatha--thus; asaktah--
without attachment; cikirsuh--desiring to; loka-sangraham--leading the
people in general.

TRANSLATION

As the ignorant perform their duties with attachment to results,
similarly the learned may also act, but without attachment, for the
sake of leading the people on the right path.

PURPORT

A person in Krsna consciousness and a person not in Krsna consciousness
are differentiated by different desires. A Krsna conscious person does
not do anything which is not conducive to development of Krsna
consciousness. He may even act exactly like the ignorant person, who is
too much attached to material activities, but one is engaged in such
activities for the satisfaction of his sense gratification, whereas the
other is engaged for the satisfaction of Krsna. Therefore, the Krsna



conscious person is required to show the people how to act and how to
engage the results of action for the purpose of Krsna consciousness.

TEXT 26

na buddhi-bhedam janayed
ajnanam karma-sanginam
josayet sarva-karmani
vidvan yuktah samacaran

SYNONYMS

na--do not; buddhi-bhedam--disrupt the intelligence; janayet--do;
ajnanam--of the foolish; karma-sanginam--attached to fruitive work;
josayet--dovetailed; sarva--all; karmani--work; vidvan--learned;
yuktah--all engaged; samacaran--practicing.

TRANSLATION

Let not the wise disrupt the minds of the ignorant who are attached to
fruitive action, they should not be encouraged to refrain from work,
but to engage in work in the spirit of devotion.

PURPORT

Vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyah: That is the end of all Vedic
rituals. All rituals, all performances of sacrifices, and everything
that is put into the Vedas, including all direction for material
activities, are meant for understanding Krsna, who is the ultimate goal
of life. But because the conditioned souls do not know anything beyond
sense gratification, they study the Vedas to that end. Through sense
regulations, however, one is gradually elevated to Krsna consciousness.
Therefore a realized soul in Krsna consciousness should not disturb
others in their activities or understanding, but he should act by
showing how the results of all work can be dedicated to the service of
Krsna. The learned Krsna conscious person may act in such a way that
the ignorant person working for sense gratification may learn how to
act and how to behave. Although the ignorant man is not to be disturbed
in his activities, still, a slightly developed Krsna conscious person
may directly be engaged in the service of the Lord without waiting for
other Vedic formulas. For this fortunate man there is no need to follow
the Vedic rituals, because in direct Krsna consciousness one can have
all the results simply by following the prescribed duties of a
particular person.

TEXT 27

prakrteh kriyamanani
gunaih karmani sarvasah
ahankara-vimudhatma
kartaham iti manyate

SYNONYMS

prakrteh--of material nature; kriyamanani--all being done; gunaih--by
the modes; karmani--activities; sarvasah--all kinds of; ahankara-
vimudha--bewildered by false ego; atma--the spirit soul; karta--doer;
aham--I; iti--thus; manyate--thinks.



TRANSLATION

The bewildered spirit soul, under the influence of the three modes of
material nature, thinks himself to be the doer of activities, which are
in actuality carried out by nature.

PURPORT

Two persons, one in Krsna consciousness and the other in material
consciousness, working on the same level, may appear to be working on
the same platform, but there is a wide gulf of difference in their
respective positions. The person in material consciousness is convinced
by false ego that he is the doer of everything. He does not know that
the mechanism of the body is produced by material nature, which works
under the supervision of the Supreme Lord. The materialistic person has
no knowledge that ultimately he is under the control of Krsna. The
person in false ego takes all credit for doing everything
independently, and that is the symptom of his nescience. He does not
know that this gross and subtle body is the creation of material
nature, under the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and as
such his bodily and mental activities should be engaged in the service
of Krsna, in Krsna consciousness. The ignorant man forgets that the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is known as Hrsikesa, or the master of
the senses of the material body, for due to his long misuse of the
senses in sense gratification, he is factually bewildered by the false
ego, which makes him forget his eternal relationship with Krsna.

TEXT 28

tattva-vit tu maha-baho
guna-karma-vibhagayoh
guna gunesu vartanta
iti matva na sajjate

SYNONYMS

tattva-vit--the knower of the Absolute Truth; tu--but; maha-baho--O
mighty-armed one; guna-karma--works under material influence;
vibhagayoh--differences; gunah--senses; gunesu--in sense gratification;
vartante--being engaged; iti--thus; matva--thinking; na--never;
sajjate--becomes attached.

TRANSLATION

One who is in knowledge of the Absolute Truth, O mighty-armed, does not
engage himself in the senses and sense gratification, knowing well the
differences between work in devotion and work for fruitive results.

PURPORT

The knower of the Absolute Truth is convinced of his awkward position
in material association. He knows that he is part and parcel of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, and that his position should not
be in the material creation. He knows his real identity as part and
parcel of the Supreme, who is eternal bliss and knowledge, and he
realizes that somehow or other he is entrapped in the material
conception of life. In his pure state of existence he is meant to



dovetail his activities in devotional service to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Krsna. He therefore engages himself in the
activities of Krsna consciousness and becomes naturally unattached to
the activities of the material senses, which are all circumstantial and
temporary. He knows that his material condition of life is under the
supreme control of the Lord; consequently he is not disturbed by all
kinds of material reactions, which he considers to be the mercy of the
Lord. According to Srimad-Bhagavatam, one who knows the Absolute Truth
in three different features--namely Brahman, Paramatma, and the Supreme
Personality of Godhead--is called tattva-vit, for he knows also his own
factual position in relationship with the Supreme.

TEXT 29

prakrter guna-sammudhah
sajjante guna-karmasu
tan akrtsna-vido mandan
krtsna-vin na vicalayet

SYNONYMS

prakrteh--impelled by the material modes; guna-sammudhah--befooled by
material identification; sajjante--become engaged; guna-karmasu--in
material activities; tan--all those; akrtsna-vidah--persons with a poor
fund of knowledge; mandan--lazy to understand self-realization; krtsna-
vit--one who is in factual knowledge; na--may not; vicalayet--try to
agitate.

TRANSLATION

Bewildered by the modes of material nature, the ignorant fully engage
themselves in material activities and become attached. But the wise
should not unsettle them, although these duties are inferior due to the
performers' lack of knowledge.

PURPORT

Persons who are unknowledgeable falsely identify with gross material
consciousness and are full of material designations. This body is a
gift of the material nature, and one who is too much attached to the
bodily consciousness is called mandan, or a lazy person without
understanding of spirit soul. Ignorant men think of the body as the
self; bodily connections with others are accepted as kinsmanship, the
land in which the body is obtained is the object of worship; and the
formalities of religious rituals are considered ends in themselves.
Social work, nationalism, and altruism are some of the activities for
such materially designated persons. Under the spell of such
designations, they are always busy in the material field; for them
spiritual realization is a myth and so they are not interested. Such
bewildered persons may even be engaged in such primary moral principles
of life as nonviolence and similar materially benevolent work. Those
who are, however, enlightened in spiritual life, should not try to
agitate such materially engrossed persons. Better to prosecute one's
own spiritual activities silently.
Men who are ignorant cannot appreciate activities in Krsna
consciousness, and therefore Lord Krsna advises us not to disturb them
and simply waste valuable time. But the devotees of the Lord are more
kind than the Lord because they understand the purpose of the Lord.



Consequently they undertake all kinds of risks, even to the point of
approaching ignorant men to try to engage them in the acts of Krsna
consciousness, which are absolutely necessary for the human being.

TEXT 30

mayi sarvani karmani
sannyasyadhyatma-cetasa
nirasir nirmamo bhutva
yudhyasva vigata-jvarah

SYNONYMS

mayi--unto Me; sarvani--all sorts of; karmani--activities; sannyasya--
giving up completely; adhyatma--with full knowledge of the self;
cetasa--consciousness; nirasih--without desire for profit; nirmamah--
without ownership; bhutva--so being; yudhyasva--fight; vigata-jvarah--
without being lethargic.

TRANSLATION

Therefore, O Arjuna, surrendering all your works unto Me, with mind
intent on Me, and without desire for gain and free from egoism and
lethargy, fight.

PURPORT

This verse clearly indicates the purpose of the Bhagavad-gita. The Lord
instructs that one has to become fully Krsna conscious to discharge
duties, as if in military discipline. Such an injunction may make
things a little difficult; nevertheless duties must be carried out,
with dependence on Krsna, because that is the constitutional position
of the living entity. The living entity cannot be happy independent of
the cooperation of the Supreme Lord because the eternal constitutional
position of the living entity is to become subordinate to the desires
of the Lord. Arjuna was, therefore, ordered by Sri Krsna to fight as if
the Lord were his military commander. One has to sacrifice everything
for the good will of the Supreme Lord, and at the same time discharge
prescribed duties without claiming proprietorship. Arjuna did not have
to consider the order of the Lord; he had only to execute His order.
The Supreme Lord is the soul of all souls; therefore, one who depends
solely and wholly on the Supreme Soul without personal consideration,
or in other words, one who is fully Krsna conscious, is called
adhyatma-cetasa. Nirasih means that one has to act on the order of the
master. Nor should one ever expect fruitive results. The cashier may
count millions of dollars for his employer, but he does not claim a
cent for himself. Similarly, one has to realize that nothing in the
world belongs to any individual person, but that everything belongs to
the Supreme Lord. That is the real purport of mayi, or "unto Me." And
when one acts in such Krsna consciousness, certainly he does not claim
proprietorship over anything. This consciousness is called nirmama, or
"nothing is mine." And, if there is any reluctance to execute such a
stern order which is without consideration of so-called kinsmen in the
bodily relationship, that reluctance should be thrown off; in this way
one may become vigata-jvara or without feverish mentality or lethargy.
Everyone, according to his quality and position, has a particular type
of work to discharge, and all such duties may be discharged in Krsna



consciousness, as described above. That will lead one to the path of
liberation.

TEXT 31

ye me matam idam nityam
anutisthanti manavah
sraddhavanto 'nasuyanto
mucyante te 'pi karmabhih

SYNONYMS

ye--those; me--My; matam--injunctions; idam--this; nityam--eternal
function; anutisthanti--execute regularly; manavah--humankind; sraddha-
vantah--with faith and devotion; anasuyantah--without envy; mucyante--
become free; te--all of them; api--even; karmabhih--from the bondage of
the law of fruitive action.

TRANSLATION

One who execute his duties according to My injunctions and who follows
this teaching faithfully, without envy, becomes free from the bondage
of fruitive actions.

PURPORT

The injunction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, is the
essence of all Vedic wisdom, and therefore is eternally true without
exception. As the Vedas are eternal, so this truth of Krsna
consciousness is also eternal. One should have firm faith in this
injunction, without envying the Lord. There are many philosophers who
write comments on the Bhagavad-gita but have no faith in Krsna. They
will never be liberated from the bondage of fruitive action. But an
ordinary man with firm faith in the eternal injunctions of the Lord,
even though unable to execute such orders, becomes liberated from the
bondage of the law of karma. In the beginning of Krsna consciousness,
one may not fully discharge the injunctions of the Lord, but because
one is not resentful of this principle and works sincerely without
consideration of defeat and hopelessness, he will surely be promoted to
the stage of pure Krsna consciousness.

TEXT 32

ye tv etad abhyasuyanto
nanutisthanti me matam
sarva-jnana-vimudhams tan
viddhi nastan acetasah

SYNONYMS

ye--those; tu--however; etat--this; abhyasuyantah--out of envy; na--do
not; anutisthanti--regularly perform; me--My; matam--injunction; sarva-
jnana--all sorts of knowledge; vimudhan--perfectly befooled; tan--they
are; viddhi--know it well; nastan--all ruined; acetasah--without Krsna
consciousness.

TRANSLATION



But those who, out of envy disregard these teachings and do not
practice them regularly, are to be considered bereft of all knowledge,
befooled, and doomed to ignorance and bondage.

PURPORT

The flaw of not being Krsna conscious is clearly stated herein. As
there is punishment for disobedience to the order of the supreme
executive head, so there is certainly punishment for the disobedience
of the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. A disobedient
person, however great he may be, is ignorant of his own self, of the
Supreme Brahman, and Paramatma and the Personality of Godhead, due to a
vacant heart. Therefore there is no hope of perfection of life for him.

TEXT 33

sadrsam cestate svasyah
prakrter jnanavan api
prakrtim yanti bhutani
nigrahah kim karisyati

SYNONYMS

sadrsam--accordingly; cestate--tries; svasyah--in one's own nature;
prakrteh--modes; jnana-van--learned; api--although; prakrtim--nature;
yanti--undergo; bhutani--all living entities; nigrahah--suppression;
kim--what; karisyati--can do.

TRANSLATION

Even a man of knowledge acts according to his own nature, for everyone
follows his nature. What can repression accomplish?

PURPORT

Unless one is situated on the transcendental platform of Krsna
consciousness he cannot get free from the influence of the modes of
material nature, as it is confirmed by the Lord in the Seventh Chapter
(7.14). Therefore, even for the most highly educated person on the
mundane plane, it is impossible to get out of the entanglement of maya
simply by theoretical knowledge, or by separating the soul from the
body. There are many so-called spiritualists who outwardly pose to be
advanced in the science, but inwardly or privately are completely under
the particular modes of nature which they are unable to surpass.
Academically, one may be very learned, but because of his long
association with material nature, he is in bondage. Krsna consciousness
helps one to get out of the material entanglement, even though one may
be engaged in his prescribed duties. Therefore, without being fully in
Krsna consciousness, no one should suddenly give up his prescribed
duties and become a so-called yogi or transcendentalist artificially.
It is better to be situated in one's position and try to attain Krsna
consciousness under superior training. Thus one may be freed from the
clutches of maya.

TEXT 34

indriyasyendriyasyarthe
raga-dvesau vyavasthitau



tayor na vasam agacchet
tau hy asya paripanthinau

SYNONYMS

indriyasya--of the senses; indriyasya arthe--in the sense objects;
raga--attachment; dvesau--also detachment; vyavasthitau--put under
regulations; tayoh--of them; na--never; vasam--control; agacchet--one
should come; tau--those; hi--certainly; asya--his; paripanthinau--
stumbling blocks.

TRANSLATION

Attraction and repulsion for sense objects are felt by embodied beings,
but one should not fall under the control of senses and sense objects
because they are stumbling blocks on the path of self-realization.

PURPORT

Those who are in Krsna consciousness are naturally reluctant to engage
in material sense gratification. But those who are not in such
consciousness should follow the rules and regulations of the revealed
scriptures. Unrestricted sense enjoyment is the cause of material
encagement, but one who follows the rules and regulations of the
revealed scriptures does not become entangled by the sense objects. For
example, sex enjoyment is a necessity for the conditioned soul, and sex
enjoyment is allowed under the license of marriage ties. For example,
according to scriptural injunctions, one is forbidden to engage in sex
relationships with any women other than one's wife. All other women are
to be considered as one's mother. But, in spite of such injunctions, a
man is still inclined to have sex relationships with other women. These
propensities are to be curbed; otherwise they will be stumbling blocks
on the path of self-realization. As long as the material body is there,
the necessities of the material body are allowed, but under rules and
regulations. And yet, we should not rely upon the control of such
allowances. One has to follow these rules and regulations, unattached
to them, because practice of sense gratification under regulations may
also lead one to go astray--as much as there is always the chance of an
accident, even on the royal roads. Although they may be very carefully
maintained, no one can guarantee that there will be no danger even on
the safest road. The sense enjoyment spirit has been current a very
long, long time, owing to material association. Therefore, in spite of
regulated sense enjoyment, there is every chance of falling down;
therefore any attachment for regulated sense enjoyment must also be
avoided by all means. But action in the loving service of Krsna
detaches one from all kinds of sensory activities. Therefore, no one
should try to be detached from Krsna consciousness at any stage of
life. The whole purpose of detachment from all kinds of sense
attachment is ultimately to become situated on the platform of Krsna
consciousness.

TEXT 35

sreyan sva-dharmo vigunah
para-dharmat sv-anusthitat
sva-dharme nidhanam sreyah
para-dharmo bhayavahah



SYNONYMS

sreyan--far better; sva-dharmah--one's prescribed duties; vigunah--even
faulty; para-dharmat--from duties mentioned for others; su-anusthitat--
than perfectly done; sva-dharme--in one's prescribed duties; nidhanam--
destruction; sreyah--better; para-dharmah--duties prescribed for
others; bhaya-avahah--dangerous.

TRANSLATION

It is far better to discharge one's prescribed duties, even though they
may be faultily, than another's duties. Destruction in the course of
performing one's own duty is better than engaging in another's duties,
for to follow another's path is dangerous.

PURPORT

One should therefore discharge his prescribed duties in full Krsna
consciousness rather than those prescribed for others. Prescribed
duties complement one's psychophysical condition, under the spell of
the modes of material nature. Spiritual duties are as ordered by the
spiritual master, for the transcendental service of Krsna. But both
materially or spiritually, one should stick to his prescribed duties
even up to death, rather than imitate another's prescribed duties.
Duties on the spiritual platform and duties on the material platform
may be different, but the principle of following the authorized
direction is always good for the performer. When one is under the spell
of the modes of material nature, one should follow the prescribed rules
for particular situations and should not imitate others. For example, a
brahmana, who is in the mode of goodness, is nonviolent, whereas a
ksatriya, who is in the mode of passion, is allowed to be violent. As
such, for a ksatriya it is better to be vanquished following the rules
of violence than to imitate a brahmana who follows the principles of
nonviolence. Everyone has to cleanse his heart by a gradual process,
not abruptly. However, when one transcends the modes of material nature
and is fully situated in Krsna consciousness, he can perform anything
and everything under the direction of the bona fide spiritual master.
In that complete stage of Krsna consciousness, the ksatriya may act as
a brahmana, or a brahmana may act as a ksatriya. In the transcendental
stage, the distinctions of the material world do not apply. For
example, Visvamitra was originally a ksatriya, but later on he acted as
a brahmana, whereas Parasurama was a brahmana, but later on he acted as
a ksatriya. Being transcendentally situated, they could do so; but as
long as one is on the material platform, he must perform his duties
according to the modes of material nature. At the same time, he must
have a full sense of Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 36

arjuna uvaca
atha kena prayukto 'yam
papam carati purusah
anicchann api varsneya
balad iva niyojitah

SYNONYMS

arjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; atha--hereafter; kena--by what; prayuktah--
impelled; ayam--one; papam--sins; carati--acts; purusah--a man;



anicchan--without desiring; api--although; varsneya--O descendant of
Vrsni; balat--by force; iva--as if; niyojitah--engaged.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: O descendant of Vrsni, by what is one impelled to sinful
acts, even unwillingly, as if engaged by force?

PURPORT

A living entity, as part and parcel of the Supreme, is originally
spiritual, pure, and free from all material contaminations. Therefore,
by nature he is not subjected to the sins of the material world. But
when he is in contact with the material nature, he acts in many sinful
ways without hesitation, and sometimes even against his will. As such,
Arjuna's question to Krsna is very sanguine, as to the perverted nature
of the living entities. Although the living entity sometimes does not
want to act in sin, he is still forced to act. Sinful actions are not,
however, impelled by the Supersoul within, but are due to another
cause, as the Lord explains in the next verse.

TEXT 37

sri-bhagavan uvaca
kama esa krodha esa
rajo-guna-samudbhavah
mahasano maha-papma
viddhy enam iha vairinam

SYNONYMS

sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Personality of Godhead said; kamah--lust; esah-
-all these; krodhah--wrath; esah--all these; rajah-guna--the mode of
passion; samudbhavah--born of; maha-asanah--all-devouring; maha-papma--
greatly sinful; viddhi--know; enam--this; iha--in the material world;
vairinam--greatest enemy.

TRANSLATION

The Blessed Lord said: It is lust only, Arjuna, which is born of
contact with the material mode of passion and later transformed into
wrath, and which is the all-devouring, sinful enemy of this world.

PURPORT

When a living entity comes in contact with the material creation, his
eternal love for Krsna is transformed into lust, in association with
the mode of passion. Or, in other words, the sense of love of God
becomes transformed into lust, as milk in contact with sour tamarind is
transformed into yogurt. Then again, when lust is unsatisfied, it turns
into wrath; wrath is transformed into illusion, and illusion continues
the material existence. Therefore, lust is the greatest enemy of the
living entity, and it is lust only which induces the pure living entity
to remain entangled in the material world. Wrath is the manifestation
of the mode of ignorance; these modes exhibit themselves as wrath and
other corollaries. If, therefore, the mode of passion, instead of being
degraded into the mode of ignorance, is elevated to the mode of



goodness by the prescribed method of living and acting, then one can be
saved from the degradation of wrath by spiritual attachment.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead expanded Himself into many for His
ever-increasing spiritual bliss, and the living entities are parts and
parcels of this spiritual bliss. They also have partial independence,
but by misuse of their independence, when the service attitude is
transformed into the propensity for sense enjoyment, they come under
the sway of lust. This material creation is created by the Lord to give
a facility to the conditioned souls to fulfill these lustful
propensities, and when they are completely baffled by prolonged lustful
activities, the living entities begin to inquire about their real
position.
This inquiry is the beginning of the Vedanta-sutras, wherein it is
said, athato brahma-jijnasa: one should inquire into the Supreme. And
the Supreme is defined in the Srimad-Bhagavatam as janmady asya yato
'nvayad itaratas ca, or, "The origin of everything is the Supreme
Brahman." Therefore, the origin of lust is also in the Supreme. If,
therefore, lust is transformed into love for the Supreme, or
transformed into Krsna consciousness--or, in other words, desiring
everything for Krsna--then both lust and wrath can be spiritualized.
Hanuman, the greatest servitor of Lord Rama, engaged his wrath upon his
enemies for the satisfaction of the Lord. Therefore, lust and wrath,
when they are employed in Krsna consciousness, become our friends
instead of our enemies.

TEXT 38

dhumenavriyate vahnir
yathadarso malena ca
yatholbenavrto garbhas
tatha tenedam avrtam

SYNONYMS

dhumena--by smoke; avriyate--covered; vahnih--fire; yatha--just as;
adarsah--mirror; malena--by dust; ca--also; yatha--just as; ulbena--by
the womb; avrtah--is covered; garbhah--embryo; tatha--so; tena--by that
lust; idam--this; avrtam--is covered.

TRANSLATION

As fire is covered by smoke, as a mirror is covered by dust, or as the
embryo is covered by the womb, similarly, the living entity is covered
by different degrees of this lust.

PURPORT

There are three degrees of covering of the living entity by which his
pure consciousness is obscured. This covering is but lust under
different manifestations like smoke in the fire, dust on the mirror,
and the womb about the embryo. When lust is compared to smoke, it is
understood that the fire of the living spark can be a little perceived.
In other words when the living entity exhibits his Krsna consciousness
slightly, he may be likened to the fire covered by smoke. Although fire
is necessary where there is smoke, there is no overt manifestation of
fire in the early stage. This stage is like the beginning of Krsna
consciousness. The dust on the mirror refers to a cleansing process of
the mirror of the mind by so many spiritual methods. The best process



is to chant the holy names of the Lord. The embryo covered by the womb
is an analogy illustrating a helpless position, for the child in the
womb is so helpless that he cannot even move. This stage of living
condition can be compared to that of the trees. The trees are also
living entities, but they have been put in such a condition of life by
such a great exhibition of lust that they are almost void of all
consciousness. The covered mirror is compared to the birds and beasts,
and the smoke covered fire is compared to the human being. In the form
of a human being, the living entity may revive a little Krsna
consciousness, and, if he makes further development, the fire of
spiritual life can be kindled in the human form of life. By careful
handling of the smoke in the fire, the fire can be made to blaze.
Therefore the human form of life is a chance for the living entity to
escape the entanglement of material existence. In the human form of
life, one can conquer the enemy, lust, by cultivation of Krsna
consciousness under able guidance.

TEXT 39

avrtam jnanam etena
jnanino nitya-vairina
kama-rupena kaunteya
duspurenanalena ca

SYNONYMS

avrtam--covered; jnanam--pure consciousness; etena--by this; jnaninah--
of the knower; nitya-vairina--eternal enemy; kama-rupena--in the form
of lust; kaunteya--O son of Kunti; duspurena--never to be satisfied;
analena--by the fire; ca--also.

TRANSLATION

Thus, a man's pure consciousness is covered by his eternal enemy in the
form of lust, which is never satisfied and which burns like fire.

PURPORT

It is said in the Manu-smrti that lust cannot be satisfied by any
amount of sense enjoyment, just as fire is never extinguished by a
constant supply of fuel. In the material world, the center of all
activities is sex, and thus this material world is called maithunya-
agara, or the shackles of sex life. In the ordinary prison house,
criminals are kept within bars; similarly, the criminals who are
disobedient to the laws of the Lord are shackled by sex life.
Advancement of material civilization on the basis of sense
gratification means increasing the duration of the material existence
of a living entity. Therefore, this lust is the symbol of ignorance by
which the living entity is kept within the material world. While one
enjoys sense gratification, it may be that there is some feeling of
happiness, but actually that so-called feeling of happiness is the
ultimate enemy of the sense enjoyer.

TEXT 40

indriyani mano buddhir
asyadhisthanam ucyate
etair vimohayaty esa



jnanam avrtya dehinam

SYNONYMS

indriyani--the senses; manah--the mind; buddhih--the intelligence;
asya--of the lust; adhisthanam--sitting place; ucyate--called; etaih--
by all these; vimohayati--bewilders; esah--of this; jnanam--knowledge;
avrtya--covering; dehinam--the embodied.

TRANSLATION

The senses, the mind and the intelligence are the sitting places of
this lust, which veils the real knowledge of the living entity and
bewilders him.

PURPORT

The enemy has captured different strategic positions in the body of the
conditioned soul, and therefore Lord Krsna is giving hints of those
places, so that one who wants to conquer the enemy may know where he
can be found. Mind is the center of all the activities of the senses,
and thus the mind is the reservoir of all ideas of sense gratification;
and, as a result, the mind and the senses become the repositories of
lust. Next, the intelligence department becomes the capital of such
lustful propensities. Intelligence is the immediate next-door neighbor
of the spirit soul. Lusty intelligence influences the spirit soul to
acquire the false ego and identify itself with matter, and thus with
the mind and the senses. The spirit soul becomes addicted to enjoying
the material senses and mistakes this as true happiness. This false
identification of the spirit soul is very nicely explained in the
Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.84.13):

yasyatma-buddhih kunape tri-dhatuke
sva-dhih kalatradisu bhauma ijya-dhih
yat-tirtha-buddhih salile na karhicij
janesv abhijnesu sa eva go-kharah

"A human being who identifies this body made of three elements with his
self, who considers the by-products of the body to be his kinsmen, who
considers the land of birth as worshipable, and who goes to the place
of pilgrimage simply to take a bath rather than meet men of
transcendental knowledge there, is to be considered as an ass or a cow.

TEXT 41

tasmat tvam indriyany adau
niyamya bharatarsabha
papmanam prajahi hy enam
jnana-vijnana-nasanam

SYNONYMS

tasmat--therefore; tvam--you; indriyani--senses; adau--in the
beginning; niyamya--by regulating; bharata-rsabha--O chief amongst the
descendants of Bharata; papmanam--the great symbol of sin; prajahi--
curb; hi--certainly; enam--this; jnana--knowledge; vijnana--scientific
knowledge of the pure soul; nasanam--the destroyer.



TRANSLATION

Therefore, O Arjuna, best of the Bharatas, in the very beginning curb
this great symbol of sin [lust] by regulating the senses, and slay this
destroyer of knowledge and self-realization.

PURPORT

The Lord advised Arjuna to regulate the senses from the very beginning
so that he could curb the greatest sinful enemy, lust, which destroys
the urge for self-realization and specifically knowledge of the self.
Jnana refers to knowledge of self as distinguished from non-self, or,
in other words, knowledge that the spirit soul is not the body. Vijnana
refers to specific knowledge of the spirit soul and knowledge of one's
constitutional position and his relationship to the Supreme Soul. It is
explained thus in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (2.9.31):

jnanam parama-guhyam me
yad vijnana-samanvitam
sa-rahasyam tad-angam ca
grhana gaditam maya

"The knowledge of the self and the Supreme Self is very confidential
and mysterious, being veiled by maya, but such knowledge and specific
realization can be understood if it is explained by the Lord Himself."
Bhagavad-gita gives us that knowledge, specifically knowledge of the
self. The living entities are parts and parcels of the Lord, and
therefore they are simply meant to serve the Lord. This consciousness
is called Krsna consciousness. So, from the very beginning of life one
has to learn this Krsna consciousness, and thereby one may become fully
Krsna conscious and act accordingly.
Lust is only the perverted reflection of love of God which is natural
for every living entity. But if one is educated in Krsna consciousness
from the very beginning, that natural love of God cannot deteriorate
into lust. When love of God deteriorates into lust, it is very
difficult to return to the normal condition. Nonetheless, Krsna
consciousness is so powerful that even a late beginner can become a
lover of God by following the regulative principles of devotional
service. So, from any stage of life, or from the time of understanding
its urgency, one can begin regulating the senses in Krsna
consciousness, devotional service of the Lord, and turn the lust into
love of Godhead--the highest perfectional stage of human life.

TEXT 42

indriyani parany ahur
indriyebhyah param manah
manasas tu para buddhir
yo buddheh paratas tu sah

SYNONYMS

indriyani--senses; parani--superior; ahuh--is said; indriyebhyah--more
than the senses; param--superior; manah--the mind; manasah--more than
the mind; tu--also; para--superior; buddhih--intelligence; yah--one
who; buddheh--more than the intelligence; paratah--superior; tu--but;
sah--he.



TRANSLATION

The working senses are superior to dull matter; mind is higher than the
senses; intelligence is still higher than the mind; and he [the soul]
is even higher than the intelligence.

PURPORT

The senses are different outlets for the activities of lust. Lust is
reserved within the body, but it is given vent through the senses.
Therefore, the senses are superior to the body as a whole. These
outlets are not in use when there is superior consciousness, or Krsna
consciousness. In Krsna consciousness the soul makes direct connection
with the Supreme Personality of Godhead; therefore the bodily
functions, as described here, ultimately end in the Supreme Soul.
Bodily action means the functions of the senses, and stopping the
senses means stopping all bodily actions. But since the mind is active,
then, even though the body may be silent and at rest, the mind will
act--as it does during dreaming. But, above the mind there is the
determination of the intelligence, and above the intelligence is the
soul proper. If, therefore, the soul is directly engaged with the
Supreme, naturally all other subordinates, namely, the intelligence,
mind and the senses, will be automatically engaged. In the Katha
Upanisad there is a passage, in which it is said that the objects of
sense gratification are superior to the senses, and mind is superior to
the sense objects. If, therefore, the mind is directly engaged in the
service of the Lord constantly, then there is no chance of the senses
becoming engaged in other ways. This mental attitude has already been
explained. If the mind is engaged in the transcendental service of the
Lord, there is no chance of its being engaged in the lower
propensities. In the Katha Upanisad the soul has been described as
mahan, the great. Therefore the soul is above all--namely, the sense
objects, the senses, the mind and the intelligence. Therefore, directly
understanding the constitutional position of the soul is the solution
of the whole problem.
With intelligence one has to seek out the constitutional position of
the soul and then engage the mind always in Krsna consciousness. That
solves the whole problem. A neophyte spiritualist is generally advised
to keep aloof from the objects of the senses. One has to strengthen the
mind by use of intelligence. If by intelligence one engages one's mind
in Krsna consciousness, by complete surrender unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, then, automatically, the mind becomes stronger,
and even though the senses are very strong, like serpents, they will be
no more effective than serpents with broken fangs. But even though the
soul is the master of intelligence and mind, and the senses also,
still, unless it is strengthened by association with Krsna in Krsna
consciousness, there is every chance of falling down due to the
agitated mind.

TEXT 43

evam buddheh param buddhva
samstabhyatmanam atmana
jahi satrum maha-baho
kama-rupam durasadam

SYNONYMS



evam--thus; buddheh--of intelligence; param--superior; buddhva--so
knowing; samstabhya--by steadying; atmanam--of the mind; atmana--by
deliberate intelligence; jahi--conquer; satrum--the enemy; maha-baho--O
mighty-armed one; kama-rupam--the form of lust; durasadam--formidable.

TRANSLATION

Thus knowing oneself to be transcendental to material senses, mind and
intelligence, one should control the lower self by the higher self and
thus--by spiritual strength--conquer this insatiable enemy known as
lust.

PURPORT

This Third Chapter of the Bhagavad-gita is conclusively directive to
Krsna consciousness by knowing oneself as the eternal servitor of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, without considering impersonal voidness
as the ultimate end. In the material existence of life, one is
certainly influenced by propensities for lust and desire for dominating
the resources of material nature. Desire for overlording and sense
gratification are the greatest enemies of the conditioned soul; but by
the strength of Krsna consciousness, one can control the material
senses, the mind and the intelligence. One may not give up work and
prescribed duties all of a sudden; but by gradually developing Krsna
consciousness, one can be situated in a transcendental position without
being influenced by the material senses and the mind--by steady
intelligence directed toward one's pure identity. This is the sum total
of this chapter. In the immature stage of material existence,
philosophical speculations and artificial attempts to control the
senses by the so-called practice of yogic postures can never help a man
toward spiritual life. He must be trained in Krsna consciousness by
higher intelligence.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Third Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of  Karma-yoga, or the Discharge of One's
Prescribed Duty in Krsna Consciousness.

“Bhagavad-gita As It Is” by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
Prabhupada.

COPYRIGHT NOTICE: This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of
this book, and is NOT FOR RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended for
personal non-commercial use only, under the “fair use” guidelines
established by international copyright laws. You may use this
electronic file to evaluate the printed version of this book, for your
own private use, or for short excerpts used in academic works,
research, student papers, presentations, and the like. You can
distribute this evaluation copy to others over the Internet, so long as
you keep this copyright information intact. You may not reproduce more
than ten percent (10%) of this book in any media without the express
written permission from the copyright holders. Reference any excerpts
in the following way: “Excerpted from “Bhagavad-gita As It Is” by A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, courtesy of the Bhaktivedanta Book
Trust International, www.Krishna.com.”

This book and electronic file is Copyright 1972-2003 Bhaktivedanta Book
Trust International, 3764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90034, USA.



All rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or to
evaluate dozens of other books in this collection, visit the website of
the publishers, www.Krishna.com.

Chapter 4
Transcendental Knowledge

TEXT 1

sri-bhagavan uvaca
imam vivasvate yogam
proktavan aham avyayam
vivasvan manave praha
manur iksvakave 'bravit

SYNONYMS

sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; imam--
this; vivasvate--unto the sun-god; yogam--the science of one's
relationship to the Supreme; proktavan--instructed; aham--I; avyayam--
imperishable; vivasvan--Vivasvan (the sun-god's name); manave--unto the
father of mankind (of the name Vaivasvata); praha--told; manuh--the
father of mankind; iksvakave--unto King Iksvaku; abravit--said.

TRANSLATION

The Blessed Lord said: I instructed this imperishable science of yoga
to the sun-god, Vivasvan, and Vivasvan instructed it to Manu, the
father of mankind, and Manu in turn instructed it to Iksvaku.

PURPORT

Herein we find the history of the Bhagavad-gita traced from a remote
time when it was delivered to the royal order, the Kings of all
planets. This science is especially meant for the protection of the
inhabitants, and therefore the royal order should understand it in
order to be able to rule the citizens and protect them from the
material bondage to lust. Human life is meant for cultivation of
spiritual knowledge, in eternal relationship with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and the executive heads of all states and all
planets are obliged to impart this lesson to the citizens by education,
culture and devotion. In other words, the executive heads of all states
are intended to spread the science of Krsna consciousness so that the
people may take advantage of this great science and pursue a successful
path, utilizing the opportunity of the human form of life.
In this millennium, the sun-god is known as Vivasvan, the king of the
sun, which is the origin of all planets within the solar system. In the
Brahma-samhita (5.52) it is stated:

yac-caksur esa savita sakala-grahanam
raja samasta-sura-murtir asesa-tejah
yasyajnaya bhramati sambhrta-kala-cakro
govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami



"Let me worship," Lord Brahma said, "the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Govinda [Krsna], who is the original person and under whose
order the sun, which is the king of all planets, is assuming immense
power and heat. The sun represents the eye of the Lord and traverses
its orbit in obedience to His order."
The sun is the king of the planets, and the sun-god (at present of the
name Vivasvan) rules the sun planet, which is controlling all other
planets by supplying heat and light. He is rotating under the order of
Krsna, and Lord Krsna originally made Vivasvan His first disciple to
understand the science of Bhagavad-gita. The Gita is not, therefore, a
speculative treatise for the insignificant mundane scholar but is a
standard book of knowledge coming down from time immemorial.
In the Mahabharata (Santi-parva 348.51-52) we can trace out the history
of the Gita as follows:

treta-yugadau ca tato
vivasvan manave dadau
manus ca loka-bhrty-artham
sutayeksvakave dadau

iksvakuna ca kathito
vyapya lokan avasthitah

"In the beginning of the Treta-yuga [millennium] this science of the
relationship with the Supreme was delivered by Vivasvan to Manu. Manu,
being the father of mankind, gave it to his son Maharaja Iksvaku, the
king of this earth planet and forefather of the Raghu dynasty in which
Lord Ramacandra appeared." Therefore, Bhagavad-gita existed in the
human society from the time of Maharaja Iksvaku.
At the present moment we have just passed through five thousand years
of the Kali-yuga, which lasts 432,000 years. Before this there was the
Dvapara-yuga (800,000 years), and before that there was Treta-yuga
(1,200,000 years). Thus, some 2,005,000 years ago, Manu spoke the
Bhagavad-gita to his disciple and son Maharaja Iksvaku, the king of
this planet earth. The age of the current Manu is calculated to last
some 305,300,000 years, of which 120,400,000 have passed. Accepting
that before the birth of Manu the Gita was spoken by the Lord to His
disciple the sun-god Vivasvan, a rough estimate is that the Gita was
spoken at least 120,400,000 years ago; and in human society it has been
extant for two million years. It was respoken by the Lord again to
Arjuna about five thousand years ago. That is the rough estimate of the
history of the Gita, according to the Gita itself and according to the
version of the speaker, Lord Sri Krsna. It was spoken to the sun-god
Vivasvan because he is also a ksatriya and is the father of all
ksatriyas who are descendants of the sun-god, or the surya-vamsa
ksatriyas. Because Bhagavad-gita is as good as the Vedas, being spoken
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, this knowledge is apauruseya,
superhuman. Since the Vedic instructions are accepted as they are,
without human interpretation, the Gita must therefore be accepted
without mundane interpretation. The mundane wranglers may speculate on
the Gita in their own ways, but that is not Bhagavad-gita as it is.
Therefore, Bhagavad-gita has to be accepted as it is, from the
disciplic succession, and it is described herein that the Lord spoke to
the sun-god, the sun-god spoke to his son Manu, and Manu spoke to his
son Iksvaku.

TEXT 2



evam parampara-praptam
imam rajarsayo viduh
sa kaleneha mahata
yogo nastah parantapa

SYNONYMS

evam--thus; parampara--disciplic succession; praptam--received; imam--
this science; raja-rsayah--the saintly kings; viduh--understood; sah--
that knowledge; kalena--in the course of time; iha--in this world;
mahata--by great; yogah--the science of one's relationship with the
Supreme; nastah--scattered; parantapa--O Arjuna, subduer of the
enemies.

TRANSLATION

This supreme science was thus received through the chain of disciplic
succession, and the saintly kings understood it in that way. But in
course of time the succession was broken, and therefore the science as
it is appears to be lost.

PURPORT

It is clearly stated that the Gita was especially meant for the saintly
kings because they were to execute its purpose in ruling over the
citizens. Certainly Bhagavad-gita was never meant for the demonic
persons, who would dissipate its value for no one's benefit and would
devise all types of interpretations according to personal whims. As
soon as the original purpose was scattered by the motives of the
unscrupulous commentators, there arose the need to reestablish the
disciplic succession. Five thousand years ago it was detected by the
Lord Himself that the disciplic succession was broken, and therefore He
declared that the purpose of the Gita appeared to be lost. In the same
way, at the present moment also there are so many editions of the Gita
(especially in English), but almost all of them are not according to
authorized disciplic succession. There are innumerable interpretations
rendered by different mundane scholars, but almost all of them do not
accept the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, although they make a
good business on the words of Sri Krsna. This spirit is demonic,
because demons do not believe in God but simply enjoy the property of
the Supreme. Since there is a great need of an edition of the Gita in
English, as it is received by the parampara (disciplic succession)
system, an attempt is made herewith to fulfill this great want.
Bhagavad-gita--accepted as it is--is a great boon to humanity; but if
it is accepted as a treatise of philosophical speculations, it is
simply a waste of time.

TEXT 3

sa evayam maya te 'dya
yogah proktah puratanah
bhakto 'si me sakha ceti
rahasyam hy etad uttamam

SYNONYMS



sah--the same ancient; eva--certainly; ayam--this; maya--by Me; te--
unto you; adya--today; yogah--the science of yoga; proktah--spoken;
puratanah--very old; bhaktah--devotee; asi--you are; me--My; sakha--
friend; ca--also; iti--therefore; rahasyam--mystery; hi--certainly;
etat--this; uttamam--transcendental.

TRANSLATION

That very ancient science of the relationship with the Supreme is today
told by Me to you because you are My devotee as well as My friend;
therefore you can understand the transcendental mystery of this
science.

PURPORT

There are two classes of men, namely the devotee and the demon. The
Lord selected Arjuna as the recipient of this great science owing to
his being a devotee of the Lord, but for the demon it is not possible
to understand this great mysterious science. There are a number of
editions of this great book of knowledge, and some of them have
commentaries by the devotees and some of them have commentaries by the
demons. Commentation by the devotees is real, whereas that of the demon
is useless. Arjuna accepts Sri Krsna as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and any commentary on the Gita following in the footsteps of
Arjuna is real devotional service to the cause of this great science.
The demonic, however, concoct something about Krsna and mislead the
public and the general readers from the path of Krsna's instructions.
One should try to follow the disciplic succession from Arjuna, and thus
be benefited.

TEXT 4

arjuna uvaca
aparam bhavato janma
param janma vivasvatah
katham etad vijaniyam
tvam adau proktavan iti

SYNONYMS

arjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; aparam--junior; bhavatah--Your; janma--
birth; param--superior; janma--birth; vivasvatah--of the sun-god;
katham--how; etat--this; vijaniyam--shall I understand; tvam--You;
adau--in the beginning; proktavan--instructed; iti--thus.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: The sun-god Vivasvan is senior by birth to You. How am I
to understand that in the beginning You instructed this science to him?

PURPORT

Arjuna is an accepted devotee of the Lord, so how could he not believe
Krsna's words? The fact is that Arjuna is not inquiring for himself but
for those who do not believe in the Supreme Personality of Godhead or
for the demons who do not like the idea that Krsna should be accepted
as the Supreme Personality of Godhead; for them only Arjuna inquires on
this point, as if he were himself not aware of the Personality of



Godhead, or Krsna. As it will be evident from the Tenth Chapter, Arjuna
knew perfectly well that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
the fountainhead of everything and the last word in transcendence. Of
course, Krsna also appeared as the son of Devaki on this earth. How
Krsna remained the same Supreme Personality of Godhead, the eternal
original person, is very difficult for an ordinary man to understand.
Therefore, to clarify this point, Arjuna put this question before Krsna
so that He Himself could speak authoritatively. That Krsna is the
supreme authority is accepted by the whole world, not only at present,
but from time immemorial, and the demons alone reject Him. Anyway,
since Krsna is the authority accepted by all, Arjuna put this question
before Him in order that Krsna would describe Himself without being
depicted by the demons who always try to distort Him in a way
understandable to the demons and their followers. It is necessary that
everyone, for his own interest, know the science of Krsna. Therefore,
when Krsna Himself speaks about Himself, it is auspicious for all the
worlds. To the demons, such explanations by Krsna Himself may appear to
be strange because the demons always study Krsna from their own
standpoint, but those who are devotees heartily welcome the statements
of Krsna when they are spoken by Krsna Himself. The devotees will
always worship such authoritative statements of Krsna because they are
always eager to know more and more about Him. The atheists, who
consider Krsna an ordinary man, may in this way come to know that Krsna
is superhuman, that He is sac-cid-ananda-vigraha--the eternal form of
bliss and knowledge--that He is transcendental, and that He is above
the domination of the modes of material nature and above the influence
of time and space. A devotee of Krsna, like Arjuna, is undoubtedly
above any misunderstanding of the transcendental position of Krsna.
Arjuna's putting this question before the Lord is simply an attempt by
the devotee to defy the atheistic attitude of persons who consider
Krsna to be an ordinary human being, subject to the modes of material
nature.

TEXT 5

sri-bhagavan uvaca
bahuni me vyatitani
janmani tava carjuna
tany aham veda sarvani
na tvam vettha parantapa

SYNONYMS

sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Personality of Godhead said; bahuni--many; me--
of Mine; vyatitani--have passed; janmani--births; tava--of yours; ca--
and also; arjuna--O Arjuna; tani--all those; aham--I; veda--do know;
sarvani--all; na--not; tvam--yourself; vettha--know; parantapa--O
subduer of the enemy.

TRANSLATION

The Blessed Lord said: Many, many births both you and I have passed. I
can remember all of them, but you cannot, O subduer of the enemy!

PURPORT

In the Brahma-samhita (5.33) we have information of many, many
incarnations of the Lord. It is stated there:



advaitam acyutam anadim ananta-rupam
adyam purana-purusam nava-yauvanam ca
vedesu durlabham adurlabham atma-bhaktau
govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami

"I worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda [Krsna], who is
the original person--absolute, infallible, without beginning. Although
expanded into unlimited forms, still the same original, the oldest, and
the person always appearing as a fresh youth. Such eternal, blissful,
all-knowing forms of the Lord are usually understood by the best Vedic
scholars, but they are always manifest to pure, unalloyed devotees."
It is also stated in Brahma-samhita (5.39):

ramadi-murtisu kala-niyamena tisthan
nanavataram akarod bhuvanesu kintu
krsnah svayam samabhavat paramah puman yo
govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami

"I worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda [Krsna], who is
always situated in various incarnations such as Rama, Nrsimha and many
subincarnations as well, but who is the original Personality of Godhead
known as Krsna, and who incarnates personally also."
In the Vedas also it is said that the Lord, although one without a
second, manifests Himself in innumerable forms. He is like the vaidurya
stone, which changes color yet still remains one. All those multiforms
are understood by the pure, unalloyed devotees, but not by a simple
study of the Vedas (vedesu durlabham adurlabham atma-bhaktau). Devotees
like Arjuna are constant companions of the Lord, and whenever the Lord
incarnates, the associate devotees also incarnate in order to serve the
Lord in different capacities. Arjuna is one of these devotees, and in
this verse it is understood that some millions of years ago when Lord
Krsna spoke the Bhagavad-gita to the sun-god Vivasvan, Arjuna, in a
different capacity, was also present. But the difference between the
Lord and Arjuna is that the Lord remembered the incident whereas Arjuna
could not remember. That is the difference between the part-and-parcel
living entity and the Supreme Lord. Although Arjuna is addressed herein
as the mighty hero who could subdue the enemies, he is unable to recall
what had happened in his various past births. Therefore, a living
entity, however great he may be in the material estimation, can never
equal the Supreme Lord. Anyone who is a constant companion of the Lord
is certainly a liberated person, but he cannot be equal to the Lord.
The Lord is described in the Brahma-samhita as infallible (acyuta),
which means that He never forgets Himself, even though He is in
material contact. Therefore, the Lord and the living entity can never
be equal in all respects, even if the living entity is as liberated as
Arjuna. Although Arjuna is a devotee of the Lord, he sometimes forgets
the nature of the Lord, but by the divine grace a devotee can at once
understand the infallible condition of the Lord, whereas a nondevotee
or a demon cannot understand this transcendental nature. Consequently
these descriptions in the Gita cannot be understood by demonic brains.
Krsna remembered acts which were performed by Him millions of years
before, but Arjuna could not, despite the fact that both Krsna and
Arjuna are eternal in nature. We may also note herein that a living
entity forgets everything due to his change of body, but the Lord
remembers because He does not change His sac-cid-ananda body. He is
advaita, which means there is no distinction between His body and
Himself. Everything in relation to Him is spirit--whereas the



conditioned soul is different from his material body. And, because the
Lord's body and self are identical, His position is always different
from the ordinary living entity, even when He descends to the material
platform. The demons cannot adjust themselves to this transcendental
nature of the Lord, which the Lord Himself explains in the following
verse.

TEXT 6

ajo 'pi sann avyayatma
bhutanam isvaro 'pi san
prakrtim svam adhisthaya
sambhavamy atma-mayaya

SYNONYMS

ajah--unborn; api--although; san--being so; avyaya--without
deterioration; atma--body; bhutanam--all those who are born; isvarah--
the Supreme Lord; api--although; san--being so; prakrtim--
transcendental form; svam--of Myself; adhisthaya--being so situated;
sambhavami--I do incarnate; atma-mayaya--by My internal energy.

TRANSLATION

Although I am unborn and My transcendental body never deteriorates, and
although I am the Lord of all sentient beings, I still appear in every
millennium in My original transcendental form.

PURPORT

The Lord has spoken about the peculiarity of His birth: although He may
appear like an ordinary person, He remembers everything of His many,
many past "births," whereas a common man cannot remember what he has
done even a few hours before. If someone is asked what he did exactly
at the same time one day earlier, it would be very difficult for a
common man to answer immediately. He would surely have to dredge his
memory to recall what he was doing exactly at the same time one day
before. And yet, men often dare claim to be God, or Krsna. One should
not be misled by such meaningless claims. Then again, the Lord explains
His prakrti, or His form. Prakrti means nature, as well as svarupa, or
one's own form. The Lord says that He appears in His own body. He does
not change His body, as the common living entity changes from one body
to another. The conditioned soul may have one kind of body in the
present birth, but he has a different body in the next birth. In the
material world, the living entity has no fixed body but transmigrates
from one body to another. The Lord, however, does not do so. Whenever
He appears, He does so in the same original body, by His internal
potency. In other words, Krsna appears in this material world in His
original eternal form, with two hands, holding a flute. He appears
exactly in His eternal body, uncontaminated by this material world.
Although He appears in the same transcendental body and is Lord of the
universe, it still appears that He takes His birth like an ordinary
living entity. Despite the fact Lord Krsna grows from childhood to
boyhood and from boyhood to youth, astonishingly enough He never ages
beyond youth. At the time of the Battle of Kuruksetra, He had many
grandchildren at home; or, in other words, He had sufficiently aged by
material calculations. Still He looked just like a young man twenty or
twenty-five years old. We never see a picture of Krsna in old age



because He never grows old like us, although He is the oldest person in
the whole creation--past, present, and future. Neither His body nor His
intelligence ever deteriorates or changes. Therefore, it is clear that
in spite of His being in the material world, He is the same unborn,
eternal form of bliss and knowledge, changeless in His transcendental
body and intelligence. Factually, His appearance and disappearance is
like the sun's rising, moving before us, and then disappearing from our
eyesight. When the sun is out of sight, we think that the sun is set,
and when the sun is before our eyes, we think that the sun is on the
horizon. Actually, the sun is always in its fixed position, but owing
to our defective, insufficient senses, we calculate the appearance and
disappearance of the sun in the sky. And, because His appearance and
disappearance are completely different from that of any ordinary,
common living entity, it is evident that He is eternal, blissful
knowledge by His internal potency--and He is never contaminated by
material nature. The Vedas also confirm that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is unborn, yet He still appears to take His birth in multi-
manifestations. The Vedic supplementary literatures also confirm that
even though the Lord appears to be taking His birth, He is still
without change of body. In the Bhagavatam, He appears before His mother
as Narayana, with four hands and the decorations of the six kinds of
full opulences. His appearance in His original eternal form is His
causeless mercy, according to the Visva-kosa dictionary. The Lord is
conscious of all of His previous appearances and disappearances, but a
common living entity forgets everything about his past body as soon as
he gets another body. He is the Lord of all living entities because He
performs wonderful and superhuman activities while He is on this earth.
Therefore, the Lord is always the same Absolute Truth and is without
differentiation between His form and self, or between His quality and
body. A question may now be raised as to why the Lord appears and
disappears in this world. This is explained in the next verse.

TEXT 7

yada yada hi dharmasya
glanir bhavati bharata
abhyutthanam adharmasya
tadatmanam srjamy aham

SYNONYMS

yada--whenever; yada--wherever; hi--certainly; dharmasya--of religion;
glanih--discrepancies; bhavati--manifested, becomes; bharata--O
descendant of Bharata; abhyutthanam--predominance; adharmasya--of
irreligion; tada--at that time; atmanam--self; srjami--manifest; aham--
I.

TRANSLATION

Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O
descendant of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion--at that
time I descend Myself.

PURPORT

The word srjami is significant herein. Srjami cannot be used in the
sense of creation, because, according to the previous verse, there is
no creation of the Lord's form or body, since all of the forms are



eternally existent. Therefore, srjami means that the Lord manifests
Himself as He is. Although the Lord appears on schedule, namely at the
end of the Dvapara-yuga of the twenty-eighth millennium of the seventh
Manu in one day of Brahma, still He has no obligation to adhere to such
rules and regulations, because He is completely free to act in many
ways at His will. He therefore appears by His own will whenever there
is a predominance of irreligiosity and a disappearance of true
religion. Principles of religion are laid down in the Vedas, and any
discrepancy in the matter of properly executing the rules of the Vedas
makes one irreligious. In the Bhagavatam it is stated that such
principles are the laws of the Lord. Only the Lord can manufacture a
system of religion. The Vedas are also accepted as originally spoken by
the Lord Himself to Brahma, from within his heart. Therefore, the
principles of dharma, or religion, are the direct orders of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead (dharmam tu saksad bhagavat-pranitam). These
principles are clearly indicated throughout the Bhagavad-gita. The
purpose of the Vedas is to establish such principles under the order of
the Supreme Lord, and the Lord directly orders, at the end of the Gita,
that the highest principle of religion is to surrender unto Him only,
and nothing more. The Vedic principles push one towards complete
surrender unto Him; and, whenever such principles are disturbed by the
demoniac, the Lord appears. From the Bhagavatam we understand that Lord
Buddha is the incarnation of Krsna who appeared when materialism was
rampant and materialists were using the pretext of the authority of the
Vedas. Although there are certain restrictive rules and regulations
regarding animal sacrifice for particular purposes in the Vedas, people
of demonic tendency still took to animal sacrifice without reference to
the Vedic principles. Lord Buddha appeared to stop this nonsense and to
establish the Vedic principles of nonviolence. Therefore each and every
avatara, or incarnation of the Lord, has a particular mission, and they
are all described in the revealed scriptures. No one should be accepted
as an avatara unless he is referred to by scriptures. It is not a fact
that the Lord appears only on Indian soil. He can advent Himself
anywhere and everywhere, and whenever He desires to appear. In each and
every incarnation, He speaks as much about religion as can be
understood by the particular people under their particular
circumstances. But the mission is the same--to lead people to God
consciousness and obedience to the principles of religion. Sometimes He
descends personally, and sometimes He sends His bona fide
representative in the form of His son, or servant, or Himself in some
disguised form.
The principles of Bhagavad-gita were spoken to Arjuna, and, for that
matter, to other highly elevated persons, because he was highly
advanced compared to ordinary persons in other parts of the world. Two
plus two equals four is a mathematical principle that is true both in
the beginner's arithmetic class and in the advanced class as well.
Still, there are higher and lower mathematics. In all incarnations of
the Lord, therefore, the same principles are taught, but they appear to
be higher and lower in varied circumstances. The higher principles of
religion begin with the acceptance of the four orders and the four
statuses of social life, as will be explained later. The whole purpose
of the mission of incarnations is to arouse Krsna consciousness
everywhere. Such consciousness is manifest and nonmanifest only under
different circumstances.

TEXT 8

paritranaya sadhunam



vinasaya ca duskrtam
dharma-samsthapanarthaya
sambhavami yuge yuge

SYNONYMS

paritranaya--for the deliverance; sadhunam--of the devotees; vinasaya--
for the annihilation; ca--also; duskrtam--of the miscreants; dharma--
principles of religion; samsthapana-arthaya--to reestablish;
sambhavami--I do appear; yuge--millennium; yuge--after millennium.

TRANSLATION

In order to deliver the pious and to annihilate the miscreants, as well
as to reestablish the principles of religion, I advent Myself,
millennium after millennium.

PURPORT

According to Bhagavad-gita, a sadhu (holy man) is a man in Krsna
consciousness. A person may appear to be irreligious, but if he has the
qualifications of Krsna consciousness wholly and fully, he is to be
understood to be a sadhu. And duskrtam applies to one who doesn't care
for Krsna consciousness. Such miscreants, or duskrtam, are described as
foolish and the lowest of mankind, even though they may be decorated
with mundane education; whereas another person, who is one hundred
percent engaged in Krsna consciousness, is accepted as a sadhu, even
though such a person may be neither learned nor well cultured. As far
as the atheistic are concerned, it is not necessary for the Supreme
Lord to appear as He is to destroy them, as He did with the demons
Ravana and Kamsa. The Lord has many agents who are quite competent to
vanquish demons. But the Lord especially descends to appease His
unalloyed devotees, who are always harassed by the demoniac. The demon
harasses the devotee, even though the latter may happen to be his kin.
Although Prahlada Maharaja was the son of Hiranyakasipu, he was
nonetheless persecuted by his father; although Devaki, the mother of
Krsna, was the sister of Kamsa, she and her husband Vasudeva were
persecuted only because Krsna was to be born of them. So Lord Krsna
appeared primarily to deliver Devaki, rather than kill Kamsa, but both
were performed simultaneously. Therefore it is said here that to
deliver the devotee and vanquish the demon miscreants, the Lord appears
in different incarnations.
In the Caitanya-caritamrta of Krsnadasa Kaviraja, the following verses
(Madhya 20.263-264) summarize these principles of incarnation:

srsti-hetu yei murti prapance avatare
sei isvara-murti 'avatara' nama dhare

mayatita paravyome sabara avasthana
visve avatari' dhare 'avatara' nama

"The avatara, or incarnation of Godhead, descends from the kingdom of
God for material manifestation. And the particular form of the
Personality of Godhead who so descends is called an incarnation, or
avatara. Such incarnations are situated in the spiritual world, the
kingdom of God. When they descend to the material creation, they assume
the name avatara."



There are various kinds of avataras, such as purusavataras,
gunavataras, lilavataras, sakty-avesa avataras, manvantara-avataras and
yugavataras--all appearing on schedule all over the universe. But Lord
Krsna is the primeval Lord, the fountainhead of all avataras. Lord Sri
Krsna descends for the specific purpose of mitigating the anxieties of
the pure devotees, who are very anxious to see Him in His original
Vrndavana pastimes. Therefore, the prime purpose of the Krsna avatara
is to satisfy His unalloyed devotees.
The Lord says that He incarnates Himself in every millennium. This
indicates that He incarnates also in the Age of Kali. As stated in the
Srimad-Bhagavatam, the incarnation in the Age of Kali is Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, who spread the worship of Krsna by the sankirtana movement
(congregational chanting of the holy names) and spread Krsna
consciousness throughout India. He predicted that this culture of
sankirtana would be broadcast all over the world, from town to town and
village to village. Lord Caitanya as the incarnation of Krsna, the
Personality of Godhead, is described secretly but not directly in the
confidential parts of the revealed scriptures, such as the Upanisads,
Mahabharata, Bhagavatam, etc. The devotees of Lord Krsna are much
attracted by the sankirtana movement of Lord Caitanya. This avatara of
the Lord does not kill the miscreants, but delivers them by His
causeless mercy.

TEXT 9

janma karma ca me divyam
evam yo vetti tattvatah
tyaktva deham punar janma
naiti mam eti so 'rjuna

SYNONYMS

janma--birth; karma--work; ca--also; me--of Mine; divyam--
transcendental; evam--like this; yah--anyone who; vetti--knows;
tattvatah--in reality; tyaktva--leaving aside; deham--this body; punah-
-again; janma--birth; na--never; eti--does attain; mam--unto Me; eti--
does attain; sah--he; arjuna--O Arjuna.

TRANSLATION

One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities
does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material
world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna.

PURPORT

The Lord's descent from His transcendental abode is already explained
in the 6th verse. One who can understand the truth of the appearance of
the Personality of Godhead is already liberated from material bondage,
and therefore he returns to the kingdom of God immediately after
quitting this present material body. Such liberation of the living
entity from material bondage is not at all easy. The impersonalists and
the yogis attain liberation only after much trouble and many, many
births. Even then, the liberation they achieve--merging into the
impersonal brahmajyoti of the Lord--is only partial, and there is the
risk of returning again to this material world. But the devotee, simply
by understanding the transcendental nature of the body and activities
of the Lord, attains the abode of the Lord after ending this body and



does not run the risk of returning again to this material world. In the
Brahma-samhita (5.33) it is stated that the Lord has many, many forms
and incarnations: advaitam acyutam anadim ananta-rupam. Although there
are many transcendental forms of the Lord, they are still one and the
same Supreme Personality of Godhead. One has to understand this fact
with conviction, although it is incomprehensible to mundane scholars
and empiric philosophers. As stated in the Vedas (Purusa-bodhini
Upanisad):

eko devo nitya-lilanurakto
bhakta-vyapi hrdy antar-atma

"The one Supreme Personality of Godhead is eternally engaged in many,
many transcendental forms in relationships with His unalloyed
devotees." This Vedic version is confirmed in this verse of the Gita
personally by the Lord. He who accepts this truth on the strength of
the authority of the Vedas and of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
and who does not waste time in philosophical speculations attains the
highest perfectional stage of liberation. Simply by accepting this
truth on faith, one can, without a doubt, attain liberation. The Vedic
version, tat tvam asi, is actually applied in this case. Anyone who
understands Lord Krsna to be the Supreme, or who says unto the Lord
"You are the same Supreme Brahman, the Personality of Godhead," is
certainly liberated instantly, and consequently his entrance into the
transcendental association of the Lord is guaranteed. In other words,
such a faithful devotee of the Lord attains perfection, and this is
confirmed by the following Vedic assertion:(Svetasvatara Upanisad 3.8)

tam eva viditvati mrtyum eti
nanyah pantha vidyate 'yanaya

One can attain the perfect stage of liberation from birth and death
simply by knowing the Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. There
is no alternative because anyone who does not understand Lord Krsna as
the Supreme Personality of Godhead is surely in the mode of ignorance.
Consequently he will not attain salvation simply, so to speak, by
licking the outer surface of the bottle of honey, or by interpreting
the Bhagavad-gita according to mundane scholarship. Such empiric
philosophers may assume very important roles in the material world, but
they are not necessarily eligible for liberation. Such puffed-up
mundane scholars have to wait for the causeless mercy of the devotee of
the Lord. One should therefore cultivate Krsna consciousness with faith
and knowledge, and in this way attain perfection.

TEXT 10

vita-raga-bhaya-krodha
man-maya mam upasritah
bahavo jnana-tapasa
puta mad-bhavam agatah

SYNONYMS

vita--freed from; raga--attachment; bhaya--fear; krodhah--anger; mat-
maya--fully in Me; mam--unto Me; upasritah--being fully situated;
bahavah--many; jnana--knowledge; tapasa--by penance; putah--being
purified; mat-bhavam--transcendental love for Me; agatah--attained.



TRANSLATION

Being freed from attachment, fear and anger, being fully absorbed in Me
and taking refuge in Me, many, many persons in the past became purified
by knowledge of Me--and thus they all attained transcendental love for
Me.

PURPORT

As described above, it is very difficult for a person who is too
materially affected to understand the personal nature of the Supreme
Absolute Truth. Generally, people who are attached to the bodily
conception of life are so absorbed in materialism that it is almost
impossible for them to understand that there is a transcendental body
which is imperishable, full of knowledge and eternally blissful. In the
materialistic concept, the body is perishable, full of ignorance and
completely miserable. Therefore, people in general keep this same
bodily idea in mind when they are informed of the personal form of the
Lord. For such materialistic men, the form of the gigantic material
manifestation is supreme. Consequently they consider the Supreme to be
impersonal. And because they are too materially absorbed, the
conception of retaining the personality after liberation from matter
frightens them. When they are informed that spiritual life is also
individual and personal, they become afraid of becoming persons again,
and so they naturally prefer a kind of merging into the impersonal
void. Generally, they compare the living entities to the bubbles of the
ocean, which merge into the ocean. That is the highest perfection of
spiritual existence attainable without individual personality. This is
a kind of fearful stage of life, devoid of perfect knowledge of
spiritual existence. Furthermore there are many persons who cannot
understand spiritual existence at all. Being embarrassed by so many
theories and by contradictions of various types of philosophical
speculation, they become disgusted or angry and foolishly conclude that
there is no supreme cause and that everything is ultimately void. Such
people are in a diseased condition of life. Some people are too
materially attached and therefore do not give attention to spiritual
life, some of them want to merge into the supreme spiritual cause, and
some of them disbelieve in everything, being angry at all sorts of
spiritual speculation out of hopelessness. This last class of men take
to the shelter of some kind of intoxication, and their affective
hallucinations are sometimes accepted as spiritual vision. One has to
get rid of all three stages of attachment to the material world,
negligence of spiritual life, fear of a spiritual personal identity,
and the conception of void that underlies the frustration of life. To
get free from these three stages of the material concept of life, one
has to take complete shelter of the Lord, guided by the bona fide
spiritual master, and follow the disciplines and regulative principles
of devotional life. The last stage of the devotional life is called
bhava, or transcendental love of Godhead.
According to Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.4.15-16), the science of
devotional service:

adau sraddha tatah sadhu-
sango 'tha bhajana-kriya
tato 'nartha-nivrttih syat
tato nistha rucis tatah

athasaktis tato bhavas



tatah premabhyudancati
sadhakanam ayam premnah
pradurbhave bhavet kramah

"In the beginning one must have a preliminary desire for self-
realization. This will bring one to the stage of trying to associate
with persons who are spiritually elevated. In the next stage one
becomes initiated by an elevated spiritual master, and under his
instruction the neophyte devotee begins the process of devotional
service. By execution of devotional service under the guidance of the
spiritual master, one becomes free from all material attachment,
attains steadiness in self-realization, and acquires a taste for
hearing about the Absolute Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna. This
taste leads one further forward to attachment for Krsna consciousness,
which is matured in bhava, or the preliminary stage of transcendental
love of God. Real love for God is called prema, the highest
perfectional stage of life." In the prema stage there is constant
engagement in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. So, by the
slow process of devotional service, under the guidance of the bona fide
spiritual master, one can attain the highest stage, being freed from
all material attachment, from the fearfulness of one's individual
spiritual personality, and from the frustrations resulting from void
philosophy. Then one can ultimately attain to the abode of the Supreme
Lord.

TEXT 11

ye yatha mam prapadyante
tams tathaiva bhajamy aham
mama vartmanuvartante
manusyah partha sarvasah

SYNONYMS

ye--all of them; yatha--as; mam--unto Me; prapadyante--surrender; tan--
unto them; tatha--so; eva--certainly; bhajami--do I reward; aham--I;
mama--My; vartma--path; anuvartante--do follow; manusyah--all men;
partha--O son of Prtha; sarvasah--in all respects.

TRANSLATION

All of them--as they surrender unto Me--I reward accordingly. Everyone
follows My path in all respects, O son of Prtha.

PURPORT

Everyone is searching for Krsna in the different aspects of His
manifestations. Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is partially
realized in His impersonal brahmajyoti effulgence and as the all-
pervading Supersoul dwelling within everything, including the particles
of atoms. But Krsna is only fully realized by His pure devotees.
Consequently, Krsna is the object of everyone's realization, and thus
anyone and everyone is satisfied according to one's desire to have Him.
In the transcendental world also, Krsna reciprocates with His pure
devotees in the transcendental attitude, just as the devotee wants Him.
One devotee may want Krsna as supreme master, another as his personal
friend, another as his son, and still another as his lover. Krsna
rewards all the devotees equally, according to their different



intensities of love for Him. In the material world, the same
reciprocations of feelings are there, and they are equally exchanged by
the Lord with the different types of worshipers. The pure devotees both
here and in the transcendental abode associate with Him in person and
are able to render personal service to the Lord and thus derive
transcendental bliss in His loving service. As for those who are
impersonalists and who want to commit spiritual suicide by annihilating
the individual existence of the living entity, Krsna helps also by
absorbing them into His effulgence. Such impersonalists do not agree to
accept the eternal, blissful Personality of Godhead; consequently they
cannot relish the bliss of transcendental personal service to the Lord,
having extinguished their individuality. Some of them, who are not
situated even in the impersonal existence, return to this material
field to exhibit their dormant desires for activities. They are not
admitted into the spiritual planets, but they are again given a chance
to act on the material planets. For those who are fruitive workers, the
Lord awards the desired results of their prescribed duties, as the
yajnesvara; and those who are yogis seeking mystic powers are awarded
such powers. In other words, everyone is dependent for success upon His
mercy alone, and all kinds of spiritual processes are but different
degrees of success on the same path. Unless, therefore, one comes to
the highest perfection of Krsna consciousness, all attempts remain
imperfect, as is stated in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (2.3.10):

akamah sarva-kamo va
moksa-kama udara-dhih
tivrena bhakti-yogena
yajeta purusam param

"Whether one is without desire [the condition of the devotees], or is
desirous of all fruitive results, or is after liberation, one should
with all efforts try to worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead for
complete perfection, culminating in Krsna consciousness."

TEXT 12

kanksantah karmanam siddhim
yajanta iha devatah
ksipram hi manuse loke
siddhir bhavati karma-ja

SYNONYMS

kanksantah--desiring; karmanam--of fruitive activities; siddhim--
perfection; yajante--worship by sacrifices; iha--in the material world;
devatah--the demigods; ksipram--very quickly; hi--certainly; manuse--in
human society; loke--within this world; siddhih bhavati--becomes
successful; karma-ja--the fruitive worker.

TRANSLATION

Men in this world desire success in fruitive activities, and therefore
they worship the demigods. Quickly, of course, men get results from
fruitive work in this world.

PURPORT



There is a great misconception about the gods or demigods of this
material world, and men of less intelligence, although passing as great
scholars, take these demigods to be various forms of the Supreme Lord.
Actually, the demigods are not different forms of God, but they are
God's different parts and parcels. God is one, and the parts and
parcels are many. The Vedas say, nityo nityanam: God is one. Isvarah
paramah krsnah. The Supreme God is one--Krsna--and the demigods are
delegated with powers to manage this material world. These demigods are
all living entities (nityanam) with different grades of material power.
They cannot be equal to the Supreme God--Narayana, Visnu, or Krsna.
Anyone who thinks that God and the demigods are on the same level is
called an atheist, or pasandi. Even the great demigods like Brahma and
Siva cannot be compared to the Supreme Lord. In fact, the Lord is
worshiped by demigods such as Brahma and Siva (siva-virinci-nutam). Yet
curiously enough there are many human leaders who are worshiped by
foolish men under the misunderstanding of anthropomorphism or
zoomorphism. Iha devatah denotes a powerful man or demigod of this
material world. But Narayana, Visnu, or Krsna, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, does not belong to this world. He is above, or
transcendental to, material creation. Even Sripada Sankaracarya, the
leader of the impersonalists, maintains that Narayana, or Krsna, is
beyond this material creation. However, foolish people (hrta-jnana)
worship the demigods because they want immediate results. They get the
results, but do not know that results so obtained are temporary and are
meant for less intelligent persons. The intelligent person is in Krsna
consciousness, and he has no need to worship the paltry demigods for
some immediate, temporary benefit. The demigods of this material world,
as well as their worshipers, will vanish with the annihilation of this
material world. The boons of the demigods are material and temporary.
Both the material worlds and their inhabitants, including the demigods,
and their worshipers, are bubbles in the cosmic ocean. In this world,
however, human society is mad after temporary things such as the
material opulence of possessing land, family and enjoyable
paraphernalia. To achieve such temporary things, they worship the
demigods or powerful men in human society. If a man gets some
ministership in the government by worshiping a political leader, he
considers that he has achieved a great boon. All of them are therefore
kowtowing to the so-called leaders or "big guns" in order to achieve
temporary boons, and they indeed achieve such things. Such foolish men
are not interested in Krsna consciousness for the permanent solution to
the hardships of material existence. They are all after sense
enjoyment, and to get a little facility for sense enjoyment they are
attracted to worship empowered living entities known as demigods. This
verse indicates that people are rarely interested in Krsna
consciousness. They are mostly interested in material enjoyment, and
therefore they worship some powerful living entity.

TEXT 13

catur-varnyam maya srstam
guna-karma-vibhagasah
tasya kartaram api mam
viddhy akartaram avyayam

SYNONYMS

catuh-varnyam--the four divisions of human society; maya--by Me;
srstam--created; guna--quality; karma--work; vibhagasah--in terms of



division; tasya--of that; kartaram--the father; api--although; mam--Me;
viddhi--you may know; akartaram--as the non-doer; avyayam--being
unchangeable.

TRANSLATION

According to the three modes of material nature and the work ascribed
to them, the four divisions of human society were created by Me. And,
although I am the creator of this system, you should know that I am yet
the non-doer, being unchangeable.

PURPORT

The Lord is the creator of everything. Everything is born of Him,
everything is sustained by Him, and everything, after annihilation,
rests in Him. He is therefore the creator of the four divisions of the
social order, beginning with the intelligent class of men, technically
called brahmanas due to their being situated in the mode of goodness.
Next is the administrative class, technically called the ksatriyas due
to their being situated in the mode of passion. The mercantile men,
called the vaisyas, are situated in the mixed modes of passion and
ignorance, and the sudras, or laborer class, are situated in the
ignorant mode of material nature. In spite of His creating the four
divisions of human society, Lord Krsna does not belong to any of these
divisions, because He is not one of the conditioned souls, a section of
whom form human society. Human society is similar to any other animal
society, but to elevate men from the animal status, the above-mentioned
divisions are created by the Lord for the systematic development of
Krsna consciousness. The tendency of a particular man toward work is
determined by the modes of material nature which he has acquired. Such
symptoms of life, according to different modes of material nature, are
described in the Eighteenth Chapter of this book. A person in Krsna
consciousness, however, is above even the brahmanas, because a brahmana
by quality is supposed to know about Brahman, the Supreme Absolute
Truth. Most of them approach the impersonal Brahman manifestation of
Lord Krsna, but only a man who transcends the limited knowledge of a
brahmana and reaches the knowledge of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Lord Sri Krsna, becomes a person in Krsna consciousness--or,
in other words, a Vaisnava. Krsna consciousness includes knowledge of
all different plenary expansions of Krsna, namely Rama, Nrsimha,
Varaha, etc. However, as Krsna is transcendental to this system of the
four divisions of human society, a person in Krsna consciousness is
also transcendental to all divisions of human society, whether we
consider the divisions of community, nation or species.

TEXT 14

na mam karmani limpanti
na me karma-phale sprha
iti mam yo 'bhijanati
karmabhir na sa badhyate

SYNONYMS

na--never; mam--unto Me; karmani--all kinds of work; limpanti--do
affect; na--nor; me--My; karma-phale--in fruitive action; sprha--
aspiration; iti--thus; mam--unto Me; yah--one who; abhijanati--does



know; karmabhih--by the reaction of such work; na--never does; sah--he;
badhyate--becomes entangled.

TRANSLATION

There is no work that affects Me; nor do I aspire for the fruits of
action. One who understands this truth about Me also does not become
entangled in the fruitive reactions of work.

PURPORT

As there are constitutional laws in the material world stating that the
king can do no wrong, or that the king is not subject to the state
laws, similarly the Lord, although He is the creator of this material
world, is not affected by the activities of the material world. He
creates and remains aloof from the creation, whereas the living
entities are entangled in the fruitive results of material activities
because of their propensity for lording it over material resources. The
proprietor of an establishment is not responsible for the right and
wrong activities of the workers, but the workers are themselves
responsible. The living entities are engaged in their respective
activities of sense gratification, and these activities are not
ordained by the Lord. For advancement of sense gratification, the
living entities are engaged in the work of this world, and they aspire
to heavenly happiness after death. The Lord, being full in Himself, has
no attraction for so-called heavenly happiness. The heavenly demigods
are only His engaged servants. The proprietor never desires the low-
grade happiness such as the workers may desire. He is aloof from the
material actions and reactions. For example, the rains are not
responsible for different types of vegetation that appear on the earth,
although without such rains there is no possibility of vegetative
growth. Vedic smrti confirms this fact as follows:

nimitta-matram evasau
srjyanam sarga-karmani
pradhana-karani-bhuta
yato vai srjya-saktayah

"In the material creations, the Lord is only the supreme cause. The
immediate cause is material nature by which the cosmic manifestation is
visible." The created beings are of many varieties, such as the
demigods, human beings and lower animals, and all of them are subject
to the reactions of their past good or bad activities. The Lord only
gives them the proper facilities for such activities and the
regulations of the modes of nature, but He is never responsible for
their past and present activities. In the Vedanta-sutra (2.1.34) it is
confirmed, vaisamya-nairghrnye na sapeksatvat: the Lord is never
partial to any living entity. The living entity is responsible for his
own acts. The Lord only gives him facilities, through the agency of
material nature, the external energy. Anyone who is fully conversant
with all the intricacies of this law of karma, or fruitive activities,
does not become affected by the results of his activities. In other
words, the person who understands this transcendental nature of the
Lord is an experienced man in Krsna consciousness, and thus he is never
subjected to the laws of karma. One who does not know the
transcendental nature of the Lord and who thinks that the activities of
the Lord are aimed at fruitive results, as are the activities of the
ordinary living entities, certainly becomes entangled himself in



fruitive reaction. One who knows the Supreme Truth is a liberated soul
fixed in Krsna consciousness.

TEXT 15

evam jnatva krtam karma
purvair api mumuksubhih
kuru karmaiva tasmat tvam
purvaih purvataram krtam

SYNONYMS

evam--thus; jnatva--knowing well; krtam--performed; karma--work;
purvaih--by past authorities; api--although; mumuksubhih--who attained
liberation; kuru--just perform; karma--prescribed duty; eva--certainly;
tasmat--therefore; tvam--you; purvaih--by the predecessors; purva-
taram--ancient predecessors; krtam--as performed.

TRANSLATION

All the liberated souls in ancient times acted with this understanding
and so attained liberation. Therefore, as the ancients, you should
perform your duty in this divine consciousness.

PURPORT

There are two classes of men. Some of them are full of polluted
material things within their hearts, and some of them are materially
free. Krsna consciousness is equally beneficial for both of these
persons. Those who are full of dirty things can take to the line of
Krsna consciousness for a gradual cleansing process, following the
regulative principles of devotional service. Those who are already
cleansed of the impurities may continue to act in the same Krsna
consciousness so that others may follow their exemplary activities and
thereby be benefited. Foolish persons or neophytes in Krsna
consciousness often want to retire from activities without having
knowledge of Krsna consciousness. Arjuna's desire to retire from
activities on the battlefield was not approved by the Lord. One need
only know how to act. To retire from the activities of Krsna
consciousness and to sit aloof making a show of Krsna consciousness, is
less important than actually engaging in the field of activities for
the sake of Krsna. Arjuna is here advised to act in Krsna
consciousness, following in the footsteps of the Lord's previous
disciples, such as the sun-god Vivasvan, as mentioned hereinbefore. The
Supreme Lord knows all His past activities, as well as those of persons
who acted in Krsna consciousness in the past. Therefore He recommends
the acts of the sun-god, who learned this art from the Lord some
millions of years before. All such students of Lord Krsna are mentioned
here as past liberated persons, engaged in the discharge of duties
allotted by Krsna.

TEXT 16

kim karma kim akarmeti
kavayo 'py atra mohitah
tat te karma pravaksyami
yaj jnatva moksyase 'subhat



SYNONYMS

kim--what is; karma--action; kim--what is; akarma--inaction; iti--thus;
kavayah--the intelligent; api--also; atra--in this matter; mohitah--
bewildered; tat--that; te--unto you; karma--work; pravaksyami--I shall
explain; yat--which; jnatva--knowing; moksyase--be liberated; asubhat--
from ill fortune.

TRANSLATION

Even the intelligent are bewildered in determining what is action and
what is inaction. Now I shall explain to you what action is knowing
which you shall be liberated from all sins.

PURPORT

Action in Krsna consciousness has to be executed in accord with the
examples of previous bona fide devotees. This is recommended in the
15th verse. Why such action should not be independent will be explained
in the text to follow.
To act in Krsna consciousness, one has to follow the leadership of
authorized persons who are in a line of disciplic succession as
explained in the beginning of this chapter. The system of Krsna
consciousness was first narrated to the sun-god, the sun-god explained
it to his son Manu, Manu explained it to his son Iksvaku, and the
system is current on this earth from that very remote time. Therefore,
one has to follow in the footsteps of previous authorities in the line
of disciplic succession. Otherwise even the most intelligent men will
be bewildered regarding the standard actions of Krsna consciousness.
For this reason, the Lord decided to instruct Arjuna in Krsna
consciousness directly. Because of the direct instruction of the Lord
to Arjuna, anyone who follows in the footsteps of Arjuna is certainly
not bewildered.
It is said that one cannot ascertain the ways of religion simply by
imperfect experimental knowledge. Actually the principles of religion
can only be laid down by the Lord Himself. Dharmam tu saksad bhagavat-
pranitam (Bhag. 6.3.19). No one can manufacture a religious principle
by imperfect speculation. One must follow in the footsteps of great
authorities like Brahma, Siva, Narada, Manu, the Kumaras, Kapila,
Prahlada, Bhisma, Sukadeva Gosvami, Yamaraja, Janaka, Bali Maharaja,
etc. By mental speculation one cannot ascertain what is religion or
self-realization. Therefore, out of causeless mercy to His devotees,
the Lord explains directly to Arjuna what action is and what inaction
is. Only action performed in Krsna consciousness can deliver a person
from the entanglement of material existence.

TEXT 17

karmano hy api boddhavyam
boddhavyam ca vikarmanah
akarmanas ca boddhavyam
gahana karmano gatih

SYNONYMS

karmanah--working order; hi--certainly; api--also; boddhavyam--should
be understood; boddhavyam--to be understood; ca--also; vikarmanah--
forbidden work; akarmanah--inaction; ca--also; boddhavyam--should be



understood; gahana--very difficult; karmanah--working order; gatih--to
enter in to.

TRANSLATION

The intricacies of action are very hard to understand. Therefore one
should know properly what action is, what forbidden action is, and what
inaction is.

PURPORT

If one is serious about liberation from material bondage, one has to
understand the distinctions between action, inaction and unauthorized
actions. One has to apply oneself to such an analysis of action,
reaction and perverted actions because it is a very difficult subject
matter. To understand Krsna consciousness and action according to the
modes, one has to learn one's relationship with the Supreme; i.e., one
who has learned perfectly knows that every living entity is the eternal
servitor of the Lord and that consequently one has to act in Krsna
consciousness. The entire Bhagavad-gita is directed toward this
conclusion. Any other conclusions, against this consciousness and its
attendant reactions, are vikarmas, or prohibited actions. To understand
all this one has to associate with authorities in Krsna consciousness
and learn the secret from them; this is as good as learning from the
Lord directly. Otherwise, even the most intelligent person will be
bewildered.

TEXT 18

karmany akarma yah pasyed
akarmani ca karma yah
sa buddhiman manusyesu
sa yuktah krtsna-karma-krt

SYNONYMS

karmani--in action; akarma--inaction; yah--one who; pasyet--observes;
akarmani--in inaction; ca--also; karma--fruitive action; yah--one who;
sah--he; buddhi-man--is intelligent; manusyesu--in human society; sah--
he; yuktah--in the transcendental position; krtsna-karma-krt--although
engaged in all activities.

TRANSLATION

One who sees inaction in action, and action in inaction, is intelligent
among men, and he is in the transcendental position, although engaged
in all sorts of activities.

PURPORT

A person acting in Krsna consciousness is naturally free from the bonds
of karma. His activities are all performed for Krsna; therefore he does
not enjoy or suffer any of the effects of work. Consequently he is
intelligent in human society, even though he is engaged in all sorts of
activities for Krsna. Akarma means without reaction to work. The
impersonalist ceases fruitive activities out of fear, so that the
resultant action may not be a stumbling block on the path of self-
realization, but the personalist knows rightly his position as the



eternal servitor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore he
engages himself in the activities of Krsna consciousness. Because
everything is done for Krsna, he enjoys only transcendental happiness
in the discharge of this service. Those who are engaged in this process
are known to be without desire for personal sense gratification. The
sense of eternal servitorship to Krsna makes one immune to all sorts of
reactionary elements of work.

TEXT 19

yasya sarve samarambhah
kama-sankalpa-varjitah
jnanagni-dagdha-karmanam
tam ahuh panditam budhah

SYNONYMS

yasya--one whose; sarve--all sorts of; samarambhah--in all attempts;
kama--desire for sense gratification; sankalpa--determination;
varjitah--are devoid of; jnana--of perfect knowledge; agni--fire;
dagdha--being burnt by; karmanam--the performer; tam--him; ahuh--
declare; panditam--learned; budhah--of those who know.

TRANSLATION

One is understood to be in full knowledge whose every act is devoid of
desire for sense gratification. He is said by sages to be a worker for
whose fruitive action is burned up by the fire of perfect knowledge.

PURPORT

Only a person in full knowledge can understand the activities of a
person in Krsna consciousness. Because the person in Krsna
consciousness is devoid of all kinds of sense-gratificatory
propensities, it is to be understood that he has burned up the
reactions of his work by perfect knowledge of his constitutional
position as the eternal servitor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
He is actually learned who has attained to such perfection of
knowledge. Development of this knowledge of the eternal servitorship to
the Lord is compared to fire. Such a fire, once kindled, can burn up
all kinds of reactions to work.

TEXT 20

tyaktva karma-phalasangam
nitya-trpto nirasrayah
karmany abhipravrtto 'pi
naiva kincit karoti sah

SYNONYMS

tyaktva--having given up; karma-phala-asangam--attachment for fruitive
results; nitya--always; trptah--being satisfied; nirasrayah--without
any shelter; karmani--in activity; abhipravrttah--being fully engaged;
api--in spite of; na--does not; eva--certainly; kincit--anything;
karoti--do; sah--he.

TRANSLATION



Abandoning all attachment to the results of his activities, ever
satisfied and independent, he performs no fruitive action, although
engaged in all kinds of undertakings.

PURPORT

This freedom from the bondage of actions is possible only in Krsna
consciousness when one is doing everything for Krsna. A Krsna conscious
person acts out of pure love for the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
and therefore he has no attraction for the results of the action. He is
not even attached to his personal maintenance, for everything is left
to Krsna. Nor is he anxious to secure things, nor to protect things
already in his possession. He does his duty to his best ability and
leaves everything to Krsna. Such an unattached person is always free
from the resultant reactions of good and bad; it is as though he were
not doing anything. This is the sign of akarma, or actions without
fruitive reactions. Any other action, therefore, devoid of Krsna
consciousness, is binding upon the worker, and that is the real aspect
of vikarma, as explained hereinbefore.

TEXT 21

nirasir yata-cittatma
tyakta-sarva-parigrahah
sariram kevalam karma
kurvan napnoti kilbisam

SYNONYMS

nirasih--without desire for the result; yata--controlled; citta-atma--
mind and intelligence; tyakta--giving up; sarva--all; parigrahah--sense
of proprietorship over all possessions; sariram--in keeping body and
soul together; kevalam--only; karma--work; kurvan--doing so; na--never;
apnoti--does acquire; kilbisam--sinful reactions.

TRANSLATION

Such a man of understanding acts with mind and intelligence perfectly
controlled, gives up all sense of proprietorship over his possessions
and acts only for the bare necessities of life. Thus working, he is not
affected by sinful reactions.

PURPORT

A Krsna conscious person does not expect good or bad results in his
activities. His mind and intelligence are fully controlled. He knows
that because he is part and parcel of the Supreme and therefore the
part played by him, as a part and parcel of the whole, is not by his
choice but is chosen for him by the Supreme and is done only through
His agency. When the hand moves, it does not move out of its own
accord, but by the endeavor of the whole body. A Krsna conscious person
is always dovetailed with the supreme desire, for he has no desire for
personal sense gratification. He moves exactly like a part of a
machine. As a machine part requires oiling and cleaning for
maintenance, similarly, a Krsna conscious man maintains himself by his
work just to remain fit for action in the transcendental loving service
of the Lord. He is therefore immune to all the reactions of his



endeavors. Like an animal, he has no proprietorship even over his own
body. A cruel proprietor of an animal sometimes kills the animal in his
possession, yet the animal does not protest. Nor does it have any real
independence. A Krsna conscious person, fully engaged in self-
realization, has very little time to falsely possess any material
object. For maintaining body and soul, he does not require unfair means
of accumulating money. He does not, therefore, become contaminated by
such material sins. He is free from all reactions to his actions.

TEXT 22

yadrccha-labha-santusto
dvandvatito vimatsarah
samah siddhav asiddhau ca
krtvapi na nibadhyate

SYNONYMS

yadrccha--out of its own accord; labha--gain; santustah--satisfied;
dvandva--duality; atitah--surpassed; vimatsarah--free from envy; samah-
-steady; siddhau--in success; asiddhau--failure; ca--also; krtva--
doing; api--although; na--never; nibadhyate--is affected.

TRANSLATION

He who is satisfied with gain which comes of its own accord, who is
free from duality and does not envy, who is steady both in success and
failure, is never entangled, although performing actions.

PURPORT

A Krsna conscious person does not make much endeavor even to maintain
his body. He is satisfied with gains which are obtained of their own
accord. He neither begs nor borrows, but he labors honestly as far as
is in his power, and is satisfied with whatever is obtained by his own
honest labor. He is therefore independent in his livelihood. He does
not allow anyone's service to hamper his own service in Krsna
consciousness. However, for the service of the Lord he can participate
in any kind of action without being disturbed by the duality of the
material world. The duality of the material world is felt in terms of
heat and cold, or misery and happiness. A Krsna conscious person is
above duality because he does not hesitate to act in any way for the
satisfaction of Krsna. Therefore he is steady both in success and in
failure. These signs are visible when one is fully in transcendental
knowledge.

TEXT 23

gata-sangasya muktasya
jnanavasthita-cetasah
yajnayacaratah karma
samagram praviliyate

SYNONYMS

gata-sangasya--unattached to the modes of material nature; muktasya--of
the liberated; jnana-avasthita--situated in transcendence; cetasah--of



such wisdom; yajnaya--for the sake of Yajna (Krsna); acaratah--so
active; karma--work; samagram--in total; praviliyate--merges entirely.

TRANSLATION

The work of a man who is unattached to the modes of material nature and
who is fully situated in transcendental knowledge merges entirely into
transcendence.

PURPORT

Becoming fully Krsna conscious, one is freed from all dualities and
thus is free from the contaminations of the material modes. He can
become liberated because he knows his constitutional position in
relationship with Krsna; and thus his mind cannot be drawn from Krsna
consciousness. Consequently, whatever he does, he does for Krsna who is
the primeval Visnu. Therefore, all his works are technically sacrifices
because sacrifice involves satisfying the Supreme Person, Krsna. The
resultant reactions to all such work certainly merge into
transcendence, and one does not suffer material effects.

TEXT 24

brahmarpanam brahma havir
brahmagnau brahmana hutam
brahmaiva tena gantavyam
brahma-karma-samadhina

SYNONYMS

brahma--spiritual in nature; arpanam--contribution; brahma--the
Supreme; havih--butter; brahma--spiritual; agnau--in the fire of
consummation; brahmana--by the spirit soul; hutam--offered; brahma--
spiritual kingdom; eva--certainly; tena--by him; gantavyam--to be
reached; brahma--spiritual; karma--activities; samadhina--by complete
absorption.

TRANSLATION

A person who is fully absorbed in Krsna consciousness is sure to attain
the spiritual kingdom because of his full contribution to spiritual
activities, in which the consummation is absolute and that which is
offered is of the same spiritual nature.

PURPORT

How activities in Krsna consciousness can lead one ultimately to the
spiritual goal is described here. There are various activities in Krsna
consciousness, and all of them will be described in the following
verses. But, for the present, just the principle of Krsna consciousness
is described. A conditioned soul, entangled in material contamination,
is sure to act in the material atmosphere, and yet he has to get out of
such an environment. The process by which the conditioned soul can get
out of the material atmosphere is Krsna consciousness. For example, a
patient who is suffering from a disorder of the bowels due to
overindulgence in milk products is cured by another milk product,
namely curds. The materially absorbed conditioned soul can be cured by
Krsna consciousness as set forth here in the Gita. This process is



generally known as yajna, or activities (sacrifices) simply meant for
the satisfaction of Visnu, or Krsna. The more the activities of the
material world are performed in Krsna consciousness, or for Visnu only,
the more the atmosphere becomes spiritualized by complete absorption.
Brahman means spiritual. The Lord is spiritual, and the rays of His
transcendental body are called brahmajyoti, His spiritual effulgence.
Everything that exists is situated in that brahmajyoti, but when the
jyoti is covered by illusion (maya) or sense gratification, it is
called material. This material veil can be removed at once by Krsna
consciousness; thus the offering for the sake of Krsna consciousness,
the consuming agent of such an offering or contribution, the process of
consumption, the contributor, and the result are--all combined
together--Brahman, or the Absolute Truth. The Absolute Truth covered by
maya is called matter. Matter dovetailed for the cause of the Absolute
Truth regains its spiritual quality. Krsna consciousness is the process
of converting the illusory consciousness into Brahman, or the Supreme.
When the mind is fully absorbed in Krsna consciousness, it is said to
be in samadhi, or trance. Anything done in such transcendental
consciousness is called yajna, or sacrifice for the Absolute. In that
condition of spiritual consciousness, the contributor, the
contribution, the consumption, the performer or leader of the
performance, and the result or ultimate gain--everything--becomes one
in the Absolute, the Supreme Brahman. That is the method of Krsna
consciousness.

TEXT 25

daivam evapare yajnam
yoginah paryupasate
brahmagnav apare yajnam
yajnenaivopajuhvati

SYNONYMS

daivam--in worshiping the demigods; eva--like this; apare--some;
yajnam--sacrifices; yoginah--the mystics; paryupasate--worship
perfectly; brahma--the Absolute Truth; agnau--in the fire of; apare--
others; yajnam--sacrifice; yajnena--by sacrifice; eva--thus;
upajuhvati--worship.

TRANSLATION

Some yogis perfectly worship the demigods by offering different
sacrifices to them, and some of them offer sacrifices in the fire of
the Supreme Brahman.

PURPORT

As described above, a person engaged in discharging duties in Krsna
consciousness is also called a perfect yogi or a first-class mystic.
But there are others also, who perform similar sacrifices in the
worship of demigods, and still others who sacrifice to the Supreme
Brahman, or the impersonal feature of the Supreme Lord. So there are
different kinds of sacrifices in terms of different categories. Such
different categories of sacrifice by different types of performers only
superficially demark varieties of sacrifice. Factual sacrifice means to
satisfy the Supreme Lord, Visnu, who is also known as Yajna. All the
different varieties of sacrifice can be placed within two primary



divisions: namely, sacrifice of worldly possessions and sacrifice in
pursuit of transcendental knowledge. Those who are in Krsna
consciousness sacrifice all material possessions for the satisfaction
of the Supreme Lord, while others, who want some temporary material
happiness, sacrifice their material possessions to satisfy demigods
such as Indra, the sun-god, etc. And others, who are impersonalists,
sacrifice their identity by merging into the existence of impersonal
Brahman. The demigods are powerful living entities appointed by the
Supreme Lord for the maintenance and supervision of all material
functions like the heating, watering and lighting of the universe.
Those who are interested in material benefits worship the demigods by
various sacrifices according to the Vedic rituals. They are called
bahv-isvara-vadi, or believers in many gods. But others, who worship
the impersonal feature of the Absolute Truth and regard the forms of
the demigods as temporary, sacrifice their individual selves in the
supreme fire and thus end their individual existences by merging into
the existence of the Supreme. Such impersonalists spend their time in
philosophical speculation to understand the transcendental nature of
the Supreme. In other words, the fruitive workers sacrifice their
material possessions for material enjoyment, whereas the impersonalist
sacrifices his material designations with a view to merging into the
existence of the Supreme. For the impersonalist, the fire altar of
sacrifice is the Supreme Brahman, and the offering is the self being
consumed by the fire of Brahman. The Krsna conscious person, like
Arjuna, however, sacrifices everything for the satisfaction of Krsna,
and thus all his material possessions as well as his own self--
everything--is sacrificed for Krsna. Thus, he is the first-class yogi;
but he does not lose his individual existence.

TEXT 26

srotradinindriyany anye
samyamagnisu juhvati
sabdadin visayan anya
indriyagnisu juhvati

SYNONYMS

srotra-adini--hearing process; indriyani--senses; anye--others;
samyama--of restraint; agnisu--in the fire; juhvati--offers; sabda-
adin--sound vibration, etc.; visayan--objects of sense gratification;
anye--others; indriya--of sense organs; agnisu--in the fire; juhvati--
sacrifice.

TRANSLATION

Some sacrifice the hearing process and the senses in the fire of the
controlled mind, and others sacrifice the objects of the senses, such
as sound, in the fire of the sacrifice.

PURPORT

The four divisions of human life, namely the brahmacari, the grhastha,
the vanaprastha, and the sannyasi, are all meant to become perfect
yogis or transcendentalists. Since human life is not meant for our
enjoying sense gratification like the animals, the four orders of human
life are so arranged that one may become perfect in spiritual life. The
brahmacaris, or students under the care of a bona fide spiritual



master, control the mind by abstaining from sense gratification. They
are referred to in this verse as sacrificing the hearing process and
the senses in the fire of the controlled mind. A brahmacari hears only
words concerning Krsna consciousness; hearing is the basic principle
for understanding, and therefore the pure brahmacari engages fully in
harer namanukirtanam--chanting and hearing the glories of the Lord. He
restrains himself from the vibrations of material sounds, and his
hearing is engaged in the transcendental sound vibration of Hare Krsna,
Hare Krsna. Similarly, the householders, who have some license for
sense gratification, perform such acts with great restraint. Sex life,
intoxication and meat eating are general tendencies of human society,
but a regulated householder does not indulge in unrestricted sex life
and other sense gratification. Marriage on principles of religious life
is therefore current in all civilized human society because that is the
way for restricted sex life. This restricted, unattached sex life is
also a kind of yajna because the restricted householder sacrifices his
general tendency toward sense gratification for higher transcendental
life.

TEXT 27

sarvanindriya-karmani
prana-karmani capare
atma-samyama-yogagnau
juhvati jnana-dipite

SYNONYMS

sarvani--all; indriya--senses; karmani--functions; prana-karmani--
functions of the life breath; ca--also; apare--others; atma-samyama--
controlling the mind; yoga--linking process; agnau--in the fire of;
juhvati--offers; jnana-dipite--because of the urge for self-
realization.

TRANSLATION

Those who are interested in self-realization, in terms of mind and
sense control, offer the functions of all the senses, as well as the
vital force [breath], as oblations into the fire of the controlled
mind.

PURPORT

The yoga system conceived by Patanjali is referred to herein. In the
Yoga-sutra of Patanjali, the soul is called pratyag-atma and parag-
atma. As long as the soul is attached to sense enjoyment, it is called
parag-atma. The soul is subjected to the functions of ten kinds of air
at work within the body, and this is perceived through the breathing
system. The Patanjali system of yoga instructs one on how to control
the functions of the body's air in a technical manner so that
ultimately all the functions of the air within become favorable for
purifying the soul of material attachment. According to this yoga
system, pratyag-atma is the ultimate goal. This pratyag-atma is a
withdrawal from activities in matter. The senses interact with the
sense objects, like the ear for hearing, eyes for seeing, nose for
smelling, tongue for tasting, hand for touching, and all of them are
thus engaged in activities outside the self. They are called the
functions of the prana-vayu. The apana-vayu goes downwards, vyana-vayu



acts to shrink and expand, samana-vayu adjusts equilibrium, udana-vayu
goes upwards--and when one is enlightened, one engages all these in
searching for self-realization.

TEXT 28

dravya-yajnas tapo-yajna
yoga-yajnas tathapare
svadhyaya-jnana-yajnas ca
yatayah samsita-vratah

SYNONYMS

dravya-yajnah--sacrificing one's possessions; tapah-yajnah--sacrifice
in austerities; yoga-yajnah--sacrifice in eightfold mysticism; tatha--
thus; apare--others; svadhyaya--sacrifice in the study of the Vedas;
jnana-yajnah--sacrifice in advancement of transcendental knowledge; ca-
-also; yatayah--enlightened; samsita--taken to strict; vratah--vows.

TRANSLATION

There are others who, enlightened by sacrificing their material
possessions in severe austerities, take strict vows and practice the
yoga of eightfold mysticism, and others study the Vedas for the
advancement of transcendental knowledge.

PURPORT

These sacrifices may be fitted into various divisions. There are
persons who are sacrificing their possessions in the form of various
kinds of charities. In India, the rich mercantile community or princely
orders open various kinds of charitable institutions like dharma-sala,
anna-ksetra, atithi-sala, anathalaya, vidya-pitha, etc. In other
countries, too, there are many hospitals, old age homes and similar
charitable foundations meant for distributing food, education and
medical treatment free to the poor. All these charitable activities are
called dravyamaya-yajna. There are others who, for higher elevation in
life or for promotion to higher planets within the universe,
voluntarily accept many kinds of austerities such as candrayana and
caturmasya. These processes entail severe vows for conducting life
under certain rigid rules. For example, under the caturmasya vow the
candidate does not shave for four months during the year (July to
October), he does not eat certain foods, does not eat twice in a day
and does not leave home. Such sacrifice of the comforts of life is
called tapomaya-yajna. There are still others who engage themselves in
different kinds of mystic yogas like the Patanjali system (for merging
into the existence of the Absolute), or hatha-yoga or astanga-yoga (for
particular perfections). And some travel to all the sanctified places
of pilgrimage. All these practices are called yoga-yajna, sacrifice for
a certain type of perfection in the material world. There are others
who engage themselves in the studies of different Vedic literatures,
specifically the Upanisads and Vedanta-sutras, or the Sankhya
philosophy. All of these are called svadhyaya-yajna. or engagement in
the sacrifice of studies. All these yogis are faithfully engaged in
different types of sacrifice and are seeking a higher status of life.
Krsna consciousness, is,  however, different from these because it is
the direct service of the Supreme Lord. Krsna consciousness cannot be
attained by any one of the above-mentioned types of sacrifices but can



be attained only by the mercy of the Lord and His bona fide devotee.
Therefore, Krsna consciousness is transcendental.

TEXT 29

apane juhvati pranam
prane 'panam tathapare
pranapana-gati ruddhva
pranayama-parayanah
apare niyataharah
pranan pranesu juhvati

SYNONYMS

apane--air which acts downward; juhvati--offers; pranam--air which acts
outward; prane--in the air going outward; apanam--air going downward;
tatha--as also; apare--others; prana--air going outward; apana--air
going downward; gati--movement; ruddhva--checking; prana-ayama--trance
induced by stopping all breathing; parayanah--so inclined; apare--
others; niyata--controlled; aharah--eating; pranan--outgoing air;
pranesu--in the outgoing air; juhvati--sacrifices.

TRANSLATION

And there are even others who are inclined to the process of breath
restraint to remain in trance, and they practice stopping the movement
of the outgoing breath into the incoming, and incoming breath into the
outgoing, and thus at last remain in trance, stopping all breathing.
Some of them, curtailing the eating process, offer the outgoing breath
into itself, as a sacrifice.

PURPORT

This system of yoga for controlling the breathing process is called
pranayama, and in the beginning it is practiced in the hatha-yoga
system through different sitting postures. All of these processes are
recommended for controlling the senses and for advancement in spiritual
realization. This practice involves controlling the air within the body
to enable simultaneous passage in opposite directions. The apana air
goes downward, and the prana air goes up. The pranayama-yogi practices
breathing the opposite way until the currents are neutralized into
puraka, equilibrium. Similarly, when the exhaled breathing is offered
to the inhaled breathing, it is called recaka. When both air currents
are completely stopped, it is called kumbhaka-yoga. By practice of
kumbhaka-yoga, the yogis increase the duration of life by many, many
years. A Krsna conscious person, however, being always situated in the
transcendental loving service of the Lord, automatically becomes the
controller of the senses. His senses, being always engaged in the
service of Krsna, have no chance of becoming otherwise engaged. So at
the end of life, he is naturally transferred to the transcendental
plane of Lord Krsna; consequently he makes no attempt to increase his
longevity. He is at once raised to the platform of liberation. A Krsna
conscious person begins from the transcendental stage, and he is
constantly in that consciousness. Therefore, there is no falling down,
and ultimately he enters into the abode of the Lord without delay. The
practice of reduced eating is automatically done when one eats only
krsna-prasadam, or food which is offered first to the Lord. Reducing
the eating process is very helpful in the matter of sense control. And



without sense control there is no possibility of getting out of
material entanglement.

TEXT 30

sarve 'py ete yajna-vido
yajna-ksapita-kalmasah
yajna-sistamrta-bhujo
yanti brahma sanatanam

SYNONYMS

sarve--all; api--although apparently different; ete--all these; yajna-
vidah--conversant with the purpose of performing; yajna--sacrifices;
ksapita--being cleansed as the result of such performances; kalmasah--
sinful reactions; yajna-sista--as a result of such performances of
yajna; amrta-bhujah--those who have tasted such nectar; yanti--do
approach; brahma--the supreme; sanatanam--eternal atmosphere.

TRANSLATION

All these performers who know the meaning of sacrifice become cleansed
of sinful reaction, and, having tasted the nectar of the results of
such sacrifice, they go to the supreme eternal atmosphere.

PURPORT

From the foregoing explanation of different types of sacrifice (namely
sacrifice of one's possessions, study of the Vedas or philosophical
doctrines, and performance of the yoga system), it is found that the
common aim of all is to control the senses. Sense gratification is the
root cause of material existence; therefore, unless and until one is
situated on a platform apart from sense gratification, there is no
chance of being elevated to the eternal platform of full knowledge,
full bliss and full life. This platform is in the eternal atmosphere,
or Brahman atmosphere. All the above-mentioned sacrifices help one to
become cleansed of the sinful reactions of material existence. By this
advancement in life, one not only becomes happy and opulent in this
life, but also, at the end, he enters into the eternal kingdom of God,
either merging into the impersonal Brahman or associating with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna.

TEXT 31

nayam loko 'sty ayajnasya
kuto 'nyah kuru-sattama

SYNONYMS

na--never; ayam--this; lokah--planet; asti--there is; ayajnasya--of the
foolish; kutah--where is; anyah--the other; kuru-sat-tama--O best
amongst the Kurus.

TRANSLATION

O best of the Kuru dynasty, without sacrifice one can never live
happily on this planet or in this life: what then of the next?



PURPORT

Whatever form of material existence one is in, one is invariably
ignorant of his real situation. In other words, existence in the
material world is due to the multiple reactions to our sinful lives.
Ignorance is the cause of sinful life, and sinful life is the cause of
one's dragging on in material existence. The human form of life is the
only loophole by which one may get out of this entanglement. The Vedas,
therefore, give us a chance for escape by pointing out the paths of
religion, economic comfort, regulated sense gratification and, at last,
the means to get out of the miserable condition entirely. The path of
religion, or the different kinds of sacrifice recommended above,
automatically solves our economic problems. By performance of yajna we
can have enough food, enough milk, etc.--even if there is a so-called
increase of population. When the body is fully supplied, naturally the
next stage is to satisfy the senses. The Vedas prescribe, therefore,
sacred marriage for regulated sense gratification. Thereby one is
gradually elevated to the platform of release from material bondage,
and the highest perfection of liberation is to associate with the
Supreme Lord. Perfection is achieved by performance of yajna
(sacrifice), as described above. Now, if a person is not inclined to
perform yajna according to the Vedas, how can he expect a happy life?
There are different grades of material comforts in different heavenly
planets, and in all cases there is immense happiness for persons
engaged in different kinds of yajna. But the highest kind of happiness
that a man can achieve is to be promoted to the spiritual planets by
practice of Krsna consciousness. A life of Krsna consciousness is
therefore the solution to all the problems of material existence.

TEXT 32

evam bahu-vidha yajna
vitata brahmano mukhe
karma-jan viddhi tan sarvan
evam jnatva vimoksyase

SYNONYMS

evam--thus; bahu-vidhah--various kinds of; yajnah--sacrifices; vitatah-
-widespread; brahmanah--of the Vedas; mukhe--in the face of; karma-jan-
-born of work; viddhi--you should know; tan--then; sarvan--all; evam--
thus; jnatva--knowing; vimoksyase--be liberated.

TRANSLATION

All these different types of sacrifice are approved by the Vedas, and
all of them are born of different types of work. Knowing them as such,
you will become liberated.

PURPORT

Different types of sacrifice, as discussed above, are mentioned in the
Vedas to suit the different types of worker. Because men are so deeply
absorbed in the bodily concept, these sacrifices are so arranged that
one can work either with the body, the mind, or the intelligence. But
all of them are recommended for ultimately bringing about liberation
from the body. This is confirmed by the Lord herewith from His own
mouth.



TEXT 33

sreyan dravya-mayad yajnaj
jnana-yajnah parantapa
sarvam karmakhilam partha
jnane parisamapyate

SYNONYMS

sreyan--greater; dravya-mayat--than the sacrifice of material
possessions; yajnat--knowledge; jnana-yajnah--sacrifice in knowledge;
parantapa--O chastiser of the enemy; sarvam--all; karma--activities;
akhilam--in totality; partha--O son of Prtha; jnane--in knowledge;
parisamapyate--ends in.

TRANSLATION

O chastiser of the enemy, the sacrifice of knowledge is greater than
the sacrifice of material possessions. O son of Prtha, after all, the
sacrifice of work culminates in transcendental knowledge.

PURPORT

The purpose of all sacrifices is to arrive at the status of complete
knowledge, then to gain release from material miseries, and,
ultimately, to engage in loving transcendental service to the Supreme
Lord (Krsna consciousness). Nonetheless, there is a mystery about all
these different activities of sacrifice, and one should know this
mystery. Sacrifices sometimes take different forms according to the
particular faith of the performer. When one's faith reaches the stage
of transcendental knowledge, the performer of sacrifices should be
considered more advanced than those who simply sacrifice material
possessions without such knowledge, for without attainment of
knowledge, sacrifices remain on the material platform and bestow no
spiritual benefit. Real knowledge culminates in Krsna consciousness,
the highest stage of transcendental knowledge. Without the elevation of
knowledge, sacrifices are simply material activities. When, however,
they are elevated to the level of transcendental knowledge, all such
activities enter onto the spiritual platform. Depending on differences
in consciousness, sacrificial activities are sometimes called karma-
kanda, fruitive activities, and sometimes jnana-kanda, knowledge in the
pursuit of truth. It is better when the end is knowledge.

TEXT 34

tad viddhi pranipatena
pariprasnena sevaya
upadeksyanti te jnanam
jnaninas tattva-darsinah

SYNONYMS

tat--that knowledge of different sacrifices; viddhi--try to understand;
pranipatena--by approaching a spiritual master; pariprasnena--by
submissive inquiries; sevaya--by the rendering of service;
upadeksyanti--initiate; te--unto you; jnanam--knowledge; jnaninah--the
self-realized; tattva--truth; darsinah--the seers.



TRANSLATION

Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master. Inquire
from him submissively and render service unto him. The self-realized
soul can impart knowledge unto you because he has seen the truth.

PURPORT

The path of spiritual realization is undoubtedly difficult. The Lord
therefore advises us to approach a bona fide spiritual master in the
line of disciplic succession from the Lord Himself. No one can be a
bona fide spiritual master without following this principle of
disciplic succession. The Lord is the original spiritual master, and a
person in the disciplic succession can convey the message of the Lord
as it is to his disciple. No one can be spiritually realized by
manufacturing his own process, as is the fashion of the foolish
pretenders. The Bhagavatam (6.3.19) says, dharmam tu saksad bhagavat-
pranitam--the path of religion is directly enunciated by the Lord.
Therefore, mental speculation or dry arguments cannot help one progress
in spiritual life. One has to approach a bona fide spiritual master to
receive the knowledge. Such a spiritual master should be accepted in
full surrender, and one should serve the spiritual master like a menial
servant, without false prestige. Satisfaction of the self-realized
spiritual master is the secret of advancement in spiritual life.
Inquiries and submission constitute the proper combination for
spiritual understanding. Unless there is submission and service,
inquiries from the learned spiritual master will not be effective. One
must be able to pass the test of the spiritual master, and when he sees
the genuine desire of the disciple, he automatically blesses the
disciple with genuine spiritual understanding. In this verse, both
blind following and absurd inquiries are condemned. One should not only
hear submissively from the spiritual master, but one must also get a
clear understanding from him, in submission and service and inquiries.
A bona fide spiritual master is by nature very kind toward the
disciple. Therefore when the student is submissive and is always ready
to render service, the reciprocation of knowledge and inquiries becomes
perfect.

TEXT 35

yaj jnatva na punar moham
evam yasyasi pandava
yena bhutany asesani
draksyasy atmany atho mayi

SYNONYMS

yat--which; jnatva--knowing; na--never; punah--again; moham--illusion;
evam--like this; yasyasi--you shall go; pandava--O son of Pandu; yena--
by which; bhutani--all living entities; asesani--totally; draksyasi--
you will see; atmani--in the Supreme Soul; atho--or in other words;
mayi--in Me.

TRANSLATION

And when you have thus learned the truth, you will know that all living
beings are but part of Me--and that they are in Me, and are Mine.



PURPORT

The result of receiving knowledge from a self-realized soul, or one who
knows things as they are, is learning that all living beings are parts
and parcels of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Sri Krsna. The
sense of a separated existence from Krsna is called maya (ma--not, ya--
this). Some think that we have nothing to do with Krsna, that Krsna is
only a great historical personality and that the Absolute is the
impersonal Brahman. Factually, as it is stated in the Bhagavad-gita,
this impersonal Brahman is the personal effulgence of Krsna. Krsna, as
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the cause of everything. In the
Brahma-samhita it is clearly stated that Krsna is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the cause of all causes. Even the millions of
incarnations are only His different expansions. Similarly, the living
entities are also expansions of Krsna. The Mayavadi philosophers
wrongly think that Krsna loses His own separate existence in His many
expansions. This thought is material in nature. We have experience in
the material world that a thing, when fragmentally distributed, loses
its own original identity. But the Mayavadi philosophers fail to
understand that absolute means that one plus one is equal to one, and
that one minus one is also equal to one. This is the case in the
absolute world.
For want of sufficient knowledge in the absolute science, we are now
covered with illusion, and therefore we think that we are separate from
Krsna. Although we are separated parts of Krsna, we are nevertheless
not different from Him. The bodily difference of the living entities is
maya, or not actual fact. We are all meant to satisfy Krsna. By maya
alone Arjuna thought that the temporary bodily relationship with his
kinsmen was more important than his eternal spiritual relationship with
Krsna. The whole teaching of the Gita is targeted toward this end: that
a living being, as His eternal servitor, cannot be separated from
Krsna, and his sense of being an identity apart from Krsna is called
maya. The living entities, as separate parts and parcels of the
Supreme, have a purpose to fulfill. Having forgotten that purpose,
since time immemorial, they are situated in different bodies, as men,
animals, demigods, etc. Such bodily differences arise from
forgetfulness of the transcendental service of the Lord. But when one
is engaged in transcendental service through Krsna consciousness, one
becomes at once liberated from this illusion. One can acquire such pure
knowledge only from the bona fide spiritual master and thereby avoid
the delusion that the living entity is equal to Krsna. Perfect
knowledge is that the Supreme Soul, Krsna, is the supreme shelter for
all living entities, and giving up such shelter, the living entities
are deluded by the material energy, imagining themselves to have a
separate identity. Thus, under different standards of material
identity, they become forgetful of Krsna. When, however, such deluded
living entities become situated in Krsna consciousness, it is to be
understood that they are on the path of liberation, as confirmed in the
Bhagavatam (2.10.6): muktir hitvanyatha-rupam svarupena vyavasthitih.
Liberation means to be situated in one's constitutional position as the
eternal servitor of Krsna (Krsna consciousness).

TEXT 36

api ced asi papebhyah
sarvebhyah papa-krt-tamah
sarvam jnana-plavenaiva



vrjinam santarisyasi

SYNONYMS

api--even; cet--if; asi--you are; papebhyah--of sinners; sarvebhyah--of
all; papa-krt-tamah--the greatest sinner; sarvam--all such sinful
actions; jnana-plavena--by the boat of transcendental knowledge; eva--
certainly; vrjinam--the ocean of miseries; santarisyasi--you will cross
completely.

TRANSLATION

Even if you are considered to be the most sinful of all sinners, when
you are situated in the boat of transcendental knowledge, you will be
able to cross over the ocean of miseries.

PURPORT

Proper understanding of one's constitutional position in relationship
to Krsna is so nice that it can at once lift one from the struggle for
existence which goes on in the ocean of nescience. This material world
is sometimes regarded as an ocean of nescience and sometimes as a
blazing forest. In the ocean, however expert a swimmer one may be, the
struggle for existence is very severe. If someone comes forward and
lifts the struggling swimmer from the ocean, he is the greatest savior.
Perfect knowledge, received from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is
the path of liberation. The boat of Krsna consciousness is very simple,
but at the same time the most sublime.

TEXT 37

yathaidhamsi samiddho 'gnir
bhasma-sat kurute 'rjuna
jnanagnih sarva-karmani
bhasma-sat kurute tatha

SYNONYMS

yatha--just as; edhamsi--firewood; samiddhah--blazing; agnih--fire;
bhasma-sat--turns into ashes; kurute--so does; arjuna--O Arjuna; jnana-
agnih--the fire of knowledge; sarva-karmani--all reactions to material
activities; bhasma-sat--to ashes; kurute--it so does; tatha--similarly.

TRANSLATION

As a blazing fire turns firewood to ashes, O Arjuna, so does the fire
of knowledge burn to ashes all reactions to material activities.

PURPORT

Perfect knowledge of self and Superself and of their relationship is
compared herein to fire. This fire not only burns up all reactions to
impious activities, but also all reactions to pious activities, turning
them to ashes. There are many stages of reaction: reaction in the
making, reaction fructifying, reaction already achieved, and reaction a
priori. But knowledge of the constitutional position of the living
entity burns everything to ashes. When one is in complete knowledge,
all reactions, both a priori and a posteriori, are consumed. In the



Vedas (Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 4.4.22) it is stated, ubhe uhaivaisa ete
taraty amrtah sadhv-asadhuni: "One overcomes both the pious and impious
reactions of work."

TEXT 38

na hi jnanena sadrsam
pavitram iha vidyate
tat svayam yoga-samsiddhah
kalenatmani vindati

SYNONYMS

na--never; hi--certainly; jnanena--with knowledge; sadrsam--in
comparison; pavitram--sanctified; iha--in this world; vidyate--exists;
tat--that; svayam--himself; yoga--in devotion; samsiddhah--matured;
kalena--in course of time; atmani--in himself; vindati--enjoys.

TRANSLATION

In this world, there is nothing so sublime and pure as transcendental
knowledge. Such knowledge is the mature fruit of all mysticism. And one
who has achieved this enjoys the self with himself in due course of
time.

PURPORT

When we speak of transcendental knowledge, we do so in terms of
spiritual understanding. As such, there is nothing so sublime and pure
as transcendental knowledge. Ignorance is the cause of our bondage, and
knowledge is the cause of our liberation. This knowledge is the mature
fruit of devotional service, and when one is situated in transcendental
knowledge, he need not search for peace elsewhere, for he enjoys peace
within himself. In other words, this knowledge and peace culminate in
Krsna consciousness. That is the last word in the Bhagavad-gita.

TEXT 39

sraddhaval labhate jnanam
tat-parah samyatendriyah
jnanam labdhva param santim
acirenadhigacchati

SYNONYMS

sraddha-van--a faithful man; labhate--achieves; jnanam--knowledge; tat-
parah--very much attached to it; samyata--controlled; indriyah--senses;
jnanam--knowledge; labdhva--having achieved; param--transcendental;
santim--peace; acirena--very soon; adhigacchati--attains.

TRANSLATION

A faithful man who is absorbed in transcendental knowledge and who
subdues his senses quickly attains the supreme spiritual peace.

PURPORT



Such knowledge in Krsna consciousness can be achieved by a faithful
person who believes firmly in Krsna. One is called a faithful man who
thinks that, simply by acting in Krsna consciousness, he can attain the
highest perfection. This faith is attained by the discharge of
devotional service, and by chanting Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna
Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare, which
cleanses one's heart of all material dirt. Over and above this, one
should control the senses. A person who is faithful to Krsna and who
controls the senses can easily attain perfection in the knowledge of
Krsna consciousness without delay.

TEXT 40

ajnas casraddadhanas ca
samsayatma vinasyati
nayam loko 'sti na paro
na sukham samsayatmanah

SYNONYMS

ajnah--fools who have no knowledge in standard scriptures; ca--and;
asraddadhanah--without faith in revealed scriptures; ca--also; samsaya-
-doubts; atma--a person; vinasyati--falls back; na--never; ayam--this;
lokah--world; asti--there is; na--neither; parah--next life; na--not;
sukham--happiness; samsaya--doubtful; atmanah--of the person.

TRANSLATION

But ignorant and faithless persons who doubt the revealed scriptures do
not attain God consciousness. For the doubting soul there is happiness
neither in this world nor in the next.

PURPORT

Out of many standard and authoritative revealed scriptures, the
Bhagavad-gita is the best. Persons who are almost like animals have no
faith in, or knowledge of the standard revealed scriptures; and some,
even though they have knowledge of, or can cite passages from, the
revealed scriptures, have actually no faith in these words. And even
though others may have faith in scriptures like Bhagavad-gita, they do
not believe in or worship the Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna. Such
persons cannot have any standing in Krsna consciousness. They fall
down. Out of all the above-mentioned persons, those who have no faith
and are always doubtful make no progress at all. Men without faith in
God and His revealed word find no good in this world, nor in the next.
For them there is no happiness whatsoever. One should therefore follow
the principles of revealed scriptures with faith and thereby be raised
to the platform of knowledge. Only this knowledge will help one become
promoted to the transcendental platform of spiritual understanding. In
other words, doubtful persons have no status whatsoever in spiritual
emancipation. One should therefore follow in the footsteps of great
acaryas who are in the disciplic succession and thereby attain success.

TEXT 41

yoga-sannyasta-karmanam
jnana-sanchinna-samsayam
atmavantam na karmani



nibadhnanti dhananjaya

SYNONYMS

yoga--devotional service in karma-yoga; sannyasta--renounced; karmanam-
-of the performers; jnana--knowledge; sanchinna--cut by the advancement
of knowledge; samsayam--doubts; atma-vantam--situated in the self; na--
never; karmani--work; nibadhnanti--do bind up; dhananjaya--O conqueror
of riches.

TRANSLATION

Therefore, one who has renounced the fruits of his action, whose doubts
are destroyed by transcendental knowledge, and who is situated firmly
in the self, is not bound by works, O conqueror of riches.

PURPORT

One who follows the instruction of the Gita, as it is imparted by the
Lord, the Personality of Godhead Himself, becomes free from all doubts
by the grace of transcendental knowledge. He, as a part and parcel of
the Lord, in full Krsna consciousness, is already established in self-
knowledge. As such, he is undoubtedly above bondage to action.

TEXT 42

tasmad ajnana-sambhutam
hrt-stham jnanasinatmanah
chittvainam samsayam yogam
atisthottistha bharata

SYNONYMS

tasmat--therefore; ajnana-sambhutam--outcome of ignorance; hrt-stham--
situated in the heart; jnana--knowledge; asina--by the weapon of;
atmanah--of the self; chittva--cutting off; enam--this; samsayam--
doubt; yogam--in yoga; atistha--be situated; uttistha--stand up to
fight; bharata--O descendant of Bharata.

TRANSLATION

Therefore the doubts which have arisen in your heart out of ignorance
should be slashed by the weapon of knowledge. Armed with yoga, O
Bharata, stand and fight.

PURPORT

The yoga system instructed in this chapter is called sanatana-yoga, or
eternal activities performed by the living entity. This yoga has two
divisions of sacrificial actions: one is called sacrifice of one's
material possessions, and the other is called knowledge of self, which
is pure spiritual activity. If sacrifice of one's material possessions
is not dovetailed for spiritual realization, then such sacrifice
becomes material. But one who performs such sacrifices with a spiritual
objective, or in devotional service, makes a perfect sacrifice. When we
come to spiritual activities, we find that these are also divided into
two: namely, understanding of one's own self (or one's constitutional
position), and the truth regarding the Supreme Personality of Godhead.



One who follows the path of the Gita as it is can very easily
understand these two important divisions of spiritual knowledge. For
him there is no difficulty in obtaining perfect knowledge of the self
as part and parcel of the Lord. And such understanding is beneficial
for such a person who easily understands the transcendental activities
of the Lord. In the beginning of this chapter, the transcendental
activities of the Lord were discussed by the Supreme Lord Himself. One
who does not understand the instructions of the Gita is faithless, and
is to be considered to be misusing the fragmental independence awarded
to him by the Lord. In spite of such instructions, one who does not
understand the real nature of the Lord as the eternal, blissful, all-
knowing Personality of Godhead, is certainly fool number one. Ignorance
can be removed by gradual acceptance of the principles of Krsna
consciousness. Krsna consciousness is awakened by different types of
sacrifices to the demigods, sacrifice to Brahman, sacrifice in
celibacy, in household life, in controlling the senses, in practicing
mystic yoga, in penance, in forgoing material possessions, in studying
the Vedas, and in partaking of the social institution called
varnasrama-dharma. All of these are known as sacrifice, and all of them
are based on regulated action. But within all these activities, the
important factor is self-realization. One who seeks that objective is
the real student of Bhagavad-gita, but one who doubts the authority of
Krsna falls back. One is therefore advised to study Bhagavad-gita, or
any other scripture, under a bona fide spiritual master, with service
and surrender. A bona fide spiritual master is in the disciplic
succession from time eternal, and he does not deviate at all from the
instructions of the Supreme Lord as they were imparted millions of
years ago to the sun-god, from whom the instructions of Bhagavad-gita
have come down to the earthly kingdom. One should, therefore, follow
the path of Bhagavad-gita as it is expressed in the Gita itself and
beware of self-interested people after personal aggrandizement who
deviate others from the actual path. The Lord is definitely the supreme
person, and His activities are transcendental. One who understands this
is a liberated person from the very beginning of his study of the Gita.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Fourth Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Transcendental Knowledge.

Chapter 5
Karma-yoga--Action in Krsna Consciousness

TEXT 1

arjuna uvaca
sannyasam karmanam krsna
punar yogam ca samsasi
yac chreya etayor ekam
tan me bruhi su-niscitam

SYNONYMS

arjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; sannyasam--renunciation; karmanam--of all
activities; krsna--O Krsna; punah--again; yogam--devotional service;
ca--also; samsasi--You are praising; yat--which; sreyah--is beneficial;
etayoh--of these two; ekam--one; tat--that; me--unto me; bruhi--please
tell; su-niscitam--definitely.

TRANSLATION



Arjuna said: O Krsna, first of all You ask me to renounce work, and
then again You recommend work with devotion. Now will You kindly tell
me definitely which of the two is more beneficial?

PURPORT

In this Fifth Chapter of the Bhagavad-gita, the Lord says that work in
devotional service is better than dry mental speculation. Devotional
service is easier than the latter because, being transcendental in
nature, it frees one from reaction. In the Second Chapter, preliminary
knowledge of the soul and its entanglement in the material body were
explained. How to get out of this material encagement by buddhi-yoga,
or devotional service, was also explained therein. In the Third
Chapter, it was explained that a person who is situated on the platform
of knowledge no longer has any duties to perform. And, in the Fourth
Chapter, the Lord told Arjuna that all kinds of sacrificial work
culminate in knowledge. However, at the end of the Fourth Chapter, the
Lord advised Arjuna to wake up and fight, being situated in perfect
knowledge. Therefore, by simultaneously stressing the importance of
both work in devotion and inaction in knowledge, Krsna has perplexed
Arjuna and confused his determination. Arjuna understands that
renunciation in knowledge involves cessation of all kinds of work
performed as sense activities. But if one performs work in devotional
service, then how is work stopped? In other words, he thinks that
sannyasa, or renunciation in knowledge, should be altogether free from
all kinds of activity because work and renunciation appear to him to be
incompatible. He appears not to have understood that work in full
knowledge is nonreactive and is therefore the same as inaction. He
inquires, therefore, whether he should cease work altogether, or work
with full knowledge.

TEXT 2

sri-bhagavan uvaca
sannyasah karma-yogas ca
nihsreyasa-karav ubhau
tayos tu karma-sannyasat
karma-yogo visisyate

SYNONYMS

sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Personality of Godhead said; sannyasah--
renunciation of work; karma-yogah--work in devotion; ca--also;
nihsreyasa-karau--all leading to the path of liberation; ubhau--both;
tayoh--of the two; tu--but; karma-sannyasat--in comparison to the
renunciation of fruitive work; karma-yogah--work in devotion;
visisyate--is better.

TRANSLATION

The Blessed Lord said: The renunciation of work and work in devotion
are both good for liberation. But, of the two, work in devotional
service is better than renunciation of works.

PURPORT



Fruitive activities (seeking sense gratification) are cause for
material bondage. As long as one is engaged in activities aimed at
improving the standard of bodily comfort, one is sure to transmigrate
to different types of bodies, thereby continuing material bondage
perpetually. Srimad-Bhagavatam (5.5.4-6) confirms this as follows:

nunam pramattah kurute vikarma
yad indriya-pritaya aprnoti
na sadhu manye yata atmano 'yam
asann api klesa-da asa dehah

parabhavas tavad abodha-jato
yavan na jijnasata atma-tattvam
yavat kriyas tavad idam mano vai
karmatmakam yena sarira-bandhah

evam manah karma-vasam prayunkte
avidyayatmany upadhiyamane
pritir na yavan mayi vasudeve
na mucyate deha-yogena tavat

"People are mad after sense gratification, and they do not know that
this present body, which is full of miseries, is a result of one's
fruitive activities in the past. Although this body is temporary, it is
always giving one trouble in many ways. Therefore, to act for sense
gratification is not good. One is considered to be a failure in life as
long as he makes no inquiry about his real identity. As long as he does
not know his real identity, he has to work for fruitive results for
sense gratification, and as long as one is engrossed in the
consciousness of sense gratification one has to transmigrate from one
body to another. Although the mind may be engrossed in fruitive
activities and influenced by ignorance, one must develop a love for
devotional service to Vasudeva. Only then can one have the opportunity
to get out of the bondage of material existence."
Therefore, jnana (or knowledge that one is not this material body but
spirit soul) is not sufficient for liberation. One has to act in the
status of spirit soul, otherwise there is no escape from material
bondage. Action in Krsna consciousness is not, however, action on the
fruitive platform. Activities performed in full knowledge strengthen
one's advancement in real knowledge. Without Krsna consciousness, mere
renunciation of fruitive activities does not actually purify the heart
of a conditioned soul. As long as the heart is not purified, one has to
work on the fruitive platform. But action in Krsna consciousness
automatically helps one escape the result of fruitive action so that
one need not descend to the material platform. Therefore, action in
Krsna consciousness is always superior to renunciation, which always
entails a risk of falling. Renunciation without Krsna consciousness is
incomplete, as is confirmed by Srila Rupa Gosvami in his Bhakti-
rasamrta-sindhu (1.2.258):

prapancikataya buddhya
hari-sambandhi-vastunah
mumuksubhih parityago
vairagyam phalgu kathyate

"Renunciation by persons eager to achieve liberation of things which
are related to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, though they are
material, is called incomplete renunciation." Renunciation is complete



when it is in the knowledge that everything in existence belongs to the
Lord and that no one should claim proprietorship over anything. One
should understand that, factually, nothing belongs to anyone. Then
where is the question of renunciation? One who knows that everything is
Krsna's property is always situated in renunciation. Since everything
belongs to Krsna, everything should be employed in the service of
Krsna. This perfect form of action in Krsna consciousness is far better
than any amount of artificial renunciation by a sannyasi of the
Mayavadi school.

TEXT 3

jneyah sa nitya-sannyasi
yo na dvesti na kanksati
nirdvandvo hi maha-baho
sukham bandhat pramucyate

SYNONYMS

jneyah--should be known; sah--he; nitya--always; sannyasi--renouncer;
yah--who; na--never; dvesti--abhors; na--nor; kanksati--desires;
nirdvandvah--free from all dualities; hi--certainly; maha-baho--O
mighty-armed one; sukham--happily; bandhat--from bondage; pramucyate--
is completely liberated.

TRANSLATION

One who neither hates nor desires the fruits of his activities is known
to be always renounced. Such a person, free from all dualities, easily
overcomes material bondage and is completely liberated, O mighty-armed
Arjuna.

PURPORT

One who is fully in Krsna consciousness is always a renouncer because
he feels neither hatred nor desire for the results of his actions. Such
a renouncer, dedicated to the transcendental loving service of the
Lord, is fully qualified in knowledge because he knows his
constitutional position in his relationship with Krsna. He knows fully
well that Krsna is the whole and that he is part and parcel of Krsna.
Such knowledge is perfect because it is qualitatively and
quantitatively correct. The concept of oneness with Krsna is incorrect
because the part cannot be equal to the whole. Knowledge that one is
one in quality yet different in quantity is correct transcendental
knowledge leading one to become full in himself, having nothing to
aspire to or lament over. There is no duality in his mind because
whatever he does, he does for Krsna. Being thus freed from the platform
of dualities, he is liberated--even in this material world.

TEXT 4

sankhya-yogau prthag balah
pravadanti na panditah
ekam apy asthitah samyag
ubhayor vindate phalam

SYNONYMS



sankhya--analytical study of the material world; yogau--work in
devotional service; prthak--different; balah--the less intelligent;
pravadanti--say; na--never; panditah--the learned; ekam--in one; api--
even; asthitah--being situated; samyak--complete; ubhayoh--of both;
vindate--enjoys; phalam--the result.

TRANSLATION

Only the ignorant speak of devotional service [karma-yoga] as being
different from the analytical study of the material world [Sankhya].
Those who are actually learned say that he who applies himself well to
one of these paths achieves the results of both.

PURPORT

The aim of the analytical study of the material world is to find the
soul of existence. The soul of the material world is Visnu, or the
Supersoul. Devotional service to the Lord entails service to the
Supersoul. One process is to find the root of the tree, and the other
is to water the root. The real student of Sankhya philosophy finds the
root of the material world, Visnu, and then, in perfect knowledge,
engages himself in the service of the Lord. Therefore, in essence,
there is no difference between the two because the aim of both is
Visnu. Those who do not know the ultimate end say that the purposes of
Sankhya and karma-yoga are not the same, but one who is learned knows
the unifying aim in these different processes.

TEXT 5

yat sankhyaih prapyate sthanam
tad yogair api gamyate
ekam sankhyam ca yogam ca
yah pasyati sa pasyati

SYNONYMS

yat--what; sankhyaih--by means of Sankhya philosophy; prapyate--is
achieved; sthanam--place; tat--that; yogaih--by devotional service;
api--also; gamyate--one can attain; ekam--one; sankhyam--analytical
study; ca--and; yogam--action in devotion; ca--and; yah--one who;
pasyati--sees; sah--he; pasyati--actually sees.

TRANSLATION

One who knows that the position reached by means of analytical study
can also be attained by devotional service, and who therefore sees
analytical study and devotional service to be on the same level, sees
things as they are.

PURPORT

The real purpose of philosophical research is to find the ultimate goal
of life. Since the ultimate goal of life is self-realization, there is
no difference between the conclusions reached by the two processes. By
Sankhya philosophical research one comes to the conclusion that a
living entity is not a part and parcel of the material world but of the
supreme spirit whole. Consequently, the spirit soul has nothing to do
with the material world; his actions must be in some relation with the



Supreme. When he acts in Krsna consciousness, he is actually in his
constitutional position. In the first process, Sankhya, one has to
become detached from matter, and in the devotional yoga process one has
to attach himself to the work of Krsna consciousness. Factually, both
processes are the same, although superficially one process appears to
involve detachment and the other process appears to involve attachment.
Detachment from matter and attachment to Krsna are one and the same.
One who can see this sees things as they are.

TEXT 6

sannyasas tu maha-baho
duhkham aptum ayogatah
yoga-yukto munir brahma
na cirenadhigacchati

SYNONYMS

sannyasah--the renounced order of life; tu--but; maha-baho--O mighty-
armed one; duhkham--distress; aptum--afflicts one with; ayogatah--
without devotional service; yoga-yuktah--one engaged in devotional
service; munih--a thinker; brahma--the Supreme; na cirena--without
delay; adhigacchati--attains.

TRANSLATION

Merely renouncing all activities yet not engaging in the devotional
service of the Lord cannot make one happy. But a thoughtful person
engaged in devotional service can achieve the Supreme without delay.

PURPORT

There are two classes of sannyasis, or persons in the renounced order
of life. The Mayavadi sannyasis are engaged in the study of Sankhya
philosophy, whereas the Vaisnava sannyasis are engaged in the study of
Bhagavatam philosophy, which affords the proper commentary on the
Vedanta-sutras. The Mayavadi sannyasis also study the Vedanta-sutras,
but use their own commentary, called Sariraka-bhasya, written by
Sankaracarya. The students of the Bhagavata school are engaged in the
devotional service of the Lord, according to pancaratriki regulations,
and therefore the Vaisnava sannyasis have multiple engagements in the
transcendental service of the Lord. The Vaisnava sannyasis have nothing
to do with material activities, and yet they perform various activities
in their devotional service to the Lord. But the Mayavadi sannyasis,
engaged in the studies of Sankhya and Vedanta and speculation, cannot
relish the transcendental service of the Lord. Because their studies
become very tedious, they sometimes become tired of Brahman
speculation, and thus they take shelter of the Bhagavatam without
proper understanding. Consequently their study of the Srimad-Bhagavatam
becomes troublesome. Dry speculations and impersonal interpretations by
artificial means are all useless for the Mayavadi sannyasis. The
Vaisnava sannyasis, who are engaged in devotional service, are happy in
the discharge of their transcendental duties, and they have the
guarantee of ultimate entrance into the kingdom of God. The Mayavadi
sannyasis sometimes fall down from the path of self-realization and
again enter into material activities of a philanthropic and altruistic
nature, which are nothing but material engagements. Therefore, the
conclusion is that those who are engaged in Krsna conscious activities



are better situated than the sannyasis engaged in simple speculation
about what is Brahman and what is not Brahman, although they too come
to Krsna consciousness, after many births.

TEXT 7

yoga-yukto visuddhatma
vijitatma jitendriyah
sarva-bhutatma-bhutatma
kurvann api na lipyate

SYNONYMS

yoga-yuktah--engaged in devotional service; visuddha-atma--a purified
soul; vijita-atma--self-controlled; jita-indriyah--having conquered the
senses; sarva-bhuta--to all living entities; atma-bhuta-atma--
compassionate; kurvan api--although engaged in work; na--never;
lipyate--is entangled.

TRANSLATION

One who works in devotion, who is a pure soul, and who controls his
mind and senses is dear to everyone, and everyone is dear to him.
Though always working, such a man is never entangled.

PURPORT

One who is on the path of liberation by Krsna consciousness is very
dear to every living being, and every living being is dear to him. This
is due to his Krsna consciousness. Such a person cannot think of any
living being as separate from Krsna, just as the leaves and branches of
a tree are not separate from the tree. He knows very well that by
pouring water on the root of the tree, the water will be distributed to
all the leaves and branches, or by supplying food to the stomach, the
energy is automatically distributed throughout the body. Because one
who works in Krsna consciousness is servant to all, he is very dear to
everyone. And because everyone is satisfied by his work, he is pure in
consciousness. Because he is pure in consciousness, his mind is
completely controlled. And because his mind is controlled, his senses
are also controlled. Because his mind is always fixed on Krsna, there
is no chance of his being deviated from Krsna. Nor is there a chance
that he will engage his senses in matters other than the service of the
Lord. He does not like to hear anything except topics relating to
Krsna; he does not like to eat anything which is not offered to Krsna;
and he does not wish to go anywhere if Krsna is not involved.
Therefore, his senses are controlled. A man of controlled senses cannot
be offensive to anyone. One may ask, "Why then was Arjuna offensive (in
battle) to others? Wasn't he in Krsna consciousness?" Arjuna was only
superficially offensive because (as has already been explained in the
Second Chapter) all the assembled persons on the battlefield would
continue to live individually, as the soul cannot be slain. So,
spiritually, no one was killed on the Battlefield of Kuruksetra. Only
their dresses were changed by the order of Krsna, who was personally
present. Therefore Arjuna, while fighting on the Battlefield of
Kuruksetra, was not really fighting at all; he was simply carrying out
the orders of Krsna in full Krsna consciousness. Such a person is never
entangled in the reactions of work.



TEXTS 8-9

naiva kincit karomiti
yukto manyeta tattva-vit
pasyan srnvan sprsan jighrann
asnan gacchan svapan svasan

pralapan visrjan grhnann
unmisan nimisann api
indriyanindriyarthesu
vartanta iti dharayan

SYNONYMS

na--never; eva--certainly; kincit--anything; karomi--I do; iti--thus;
yuktah--engaged in the divine consciousness; manyeta--thinks; tattva-
vit--one who knows the truth; pasyan--seeing; srnvan--hearing; sprsan--
touching; jighran--smelling; asnan--eating; gacchan--going; svapan--
dreaming; svasan--breathing; pralapan--talking; visrjan--giving up;
grhnan--accepting; unmisan--opening; nimisan--closing; api--in spite
of; indriyani--the senses; indriya-arthesu--in sense gratification;
vartante--let them be so engaged; iti--thus; dharayan--considering.

TRANSLATION

A person in the divine consciousness, although engaged in seeing,
hearing, touching, smelling, eating, moving about, sleeping and
breathing, always knows within himself that he actually does nothing at
all. Because while speaking, evacuating, receiving, opening or closing
his eyes, he always knows that only the material senses are engaged
with their objects and that he is aloof from them.

PURPORT

A person in Krsna consciousness is pure in his existence, and
consequently he has nothing to do with any work which depends upon five
immediate and remote causes, the doer, the work, the situation, the
endeavor and fortune. This is because he is engaged in the loving
transcendental service of Krsna. Although he appears to be acting with
his body and senses, he is always conscious of his actual position,
which is spiritual engagement. In material consciousness, the senses
are engaged in sense gratification, but in Krsna consciousness the
senses are engaged in the satisfaction of Krsna's senses. Therefore,
the Krsna conscious person is always free, even though he appears to be
engaged in things of the senses. Activities such as seeing, hearing,
speaking, evacuating, etc., are actions of the senses meant for work. A
Krsna conscious person is never affected by the actions of the senses.
He cannot perform any act except in the service of the Lord because he
knows that he is the eternal servitor of the Lord.

TEXT 10

brahmany adhaya karmani
sangam tyaktva karoti yah
lipyate na sa papena
padma-patram ivambhasa

SYNONYMS



brahmani--the Supreme Personality of Godhead; adhaya--resigning unto;
karmani--all works; sangam--attachment; tyaktva--giving up; karoti--
performs; yah--who; lipyate--is affected; na--never; sah--he; papena--
by sin; padma-patram--lotus leaf; iva--like; ambhasa--in the water.

TRANSLATION

One who performs his duty without attachment, surrendering the results
unto the Supreme God, is not affected by sinful action, as the lotus
leaf is untouched by water.

PURPORT

Here brahmani means in Krsna consciousness. The material world is a sum
total manifestation of the three modes of material nature, technically
called the pradhana. The Vedic hymns sarvam hy etad brahma (Mandukya
Upanisad 2), tasmad etad brahma nama-rupam annam ca jayate (Mundaka
Upanisad 1.2.10), and, in the Bhagavad-gita (14.3), mama yonir mahad
brahma, indicate that everything in the material world is the
manifestation of Brahman; and, although the effects are differently
manifested, they are nondifferent from the cause. In the Isopanisad it
is said that everything is related to the Supreme Brahman, or Krsna,
and thus everything belongs to Him only. One who knows perfectly well
that everything belongs to Krsna, that He is the proprietor of
everything and that, therefore, everything is engaged in the service of
the Lord, naturally has nothing to do with the results of his
activities, whether virtuous or sinful. Even one's material body, being
a gift of the Lord for carrying out a particular type of action, can be
engaged in Krsna consciousness. It is beyond contamination by sinful
reactions, exactly as the lotus leaf, though remaining in the water, is
not wet. The Lord also says in the Gita (3.30), mayi sarvani karmani
sannyasya: "Resign all works unto Me [Krsna]." The conclusion is that a
person without Krsna consciousness acts according to the concept of the
material body and senses, but a person in Krsna consciousness acts
according to the knowledge that the body is the property of Krsna and
should therefore be engaged in the service of Krsna.

TEXT 11

kayena manasa buddhya
kevalair indriyair api
yoginah karma kurvanti
sangam tyaktvatma-suddhaye

SYNONYMS

kayena--with the body; manasa--with the mind; buddhya--with the
intelligence; kevalaih--purified; indriyaih--with the senses; api--even
with; yoginah--Krsna conscious persons; karma--actions; kurvanti--they
act; sangam--attachment; tyaktva--giving up; atma--self; suddhaye--for
the purpose of purification.

TRANSLATION

The yogis, abandoning attachment, act with body, mind, intelligence,
and even with the senses, only for the purpose of purification.



PURPORT

By acting in Krsna consciousness for the satisfaction of the senses of
Krsna, any action, whether of the body, mind, intelligence or even the
senses, is purified of material contamination. There are no material
reactions resulting from the activities of a Krsna conscious person.
Therefore, purified activities, which are generally called sad-acara,
can be easily performed by acting in Krsna consciousness. Sri Rupa
Gosvami in his Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.2.187) describes this as
follows:

iha yasya harer dasye
karmana manasa gira
nikhilasv apy avasthasu
jivan-muktah sa ucyate

"A person acting in Krsna consciousness (or, in other words, in the
service of Krsna) with his body, mind, intelligence and words is a
liberated person even within the material world, although he may be
engaged in many so-called material activities." He has no false ego,
nor does he believe that he is this material body, nor that he
possesses the body. He knows that he is not this body and that this
body does not belong to him. He himself belongs to Krsna, and the body
too belongs to Krsna. When he applies everything produced of the body,
mind, intelligence, words, life, wealth, etc.--whatever he may have
within his possession--to Krsna's service, he is at once dovetailed
with Krsna. He is one with Krsna and is devoid of the false ego that
leads one to believe that he is the body, etc. This is the perfect
stage of Krsna consciousness.

TEXT 12

yuktah karma-phalam tyaktva
santim apnoti naisthikim
ayuktah kama-karena
phale sakto nibadhyate

SYNONYMS

yuktah--one who is engaged in devotional service; karma-phalam--the
results of all activities; tyaktva--giving up; santim--perfect peace;
apnoti--achieves; naisthikim--unflinching; ayuktah--one who is not in
Krsna consciousness; kama-karena--for enjoying the result of work;
phale--in the result; saktah--attached; nibadhyate--becomes entangled.

TRANSLATION

The steadily devoted soul attains unadulterated peace because he offers
the result of all activities to Me; whereas a person who is not in
union with the Divine, who is greedy for the fruits of his labor,
becomes entangled.

PURPORT

The difference between a person in Krsna consciousness and a person in
bodily consciousness is that the former is attached to Krsna whereas
the latter is attached to the results of his activities. The person who
is attached to Krsna and works for Him only is certainly a liberated



person, and he is not anxious for fruitive rewards. In the Bhagavatam,
the cause of anxiety over the result of an activity is explained as
being one's functioning in the conception of duality, that is, without
knowledge of the Absolute Truth. Krsna is the Supreme Absolute Truth,
the Personality of Godhead. In Krsna consciousness, there is no
duality. All that exists is a product of Krsna's energy, and Krsna is
all good. Therefore, activities in Krsna consciousness are on the
absolute plane; they are transcendental and have no material effect.
One is, therefore, filled with peace in Krsna consciousness. One who
is, however, entangled in profit calculation for sense gratification
cannot have that peace. This is the secret of Krsna consciousness--
realization that there is no existence besides Krsna is the platform of
peace and fearlessness.

TEXT 13

sarva-karmani manasa
sannyasyaste sukham vasi
nava-dvare pure dehi
naiva kurvan na karayan

SYNONYMS

sarva--all; karmani--activities; manasa--by the mind; sannyasya--giving
up; aste--remains; sukham--in happiness; vasi--one who is controlled;
nava-dvare--in the place where there are nine gates; pure--in the city;
dehi--the embodied soul; na--never; eva--certainly; kurvan--doing
anything; na--not; karayan--causing to be done.

TRANSLATION

When the embodied living being controls his nature and mentally
renounces all actions, he resides happily in the city of nine gates
[the material body], neither working nor causing work to be done.

PURPORT

The embodied soul lives in the city of nine gates. The activities of
the body, or the figurative city of body, are conducted automatically
by the particular modes of nature. The soul, although subjecting
himself to the conditions of the body, can be beyond those conditions,
if he so desires. Owing only to forgetfulness of his superior nature,
he identifies with the material body, and therefore suffers. By Krsna
consciousness, he can revive his real position and thus come out of his
embodiment. Therefore, when one takes to Krsna consciousness, one at
once becomes completely aloof from bodily activities. In such a
controlled life, in which his deliberations are changed, he lives
happily within the city of nine gates. The nine gates are described as
follows:

nava-dvare pure dehi
hamso lelayate bahih
vasi sarvasya lokasya
sthavarasya carasya ca

"The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is living within the body of a
living entity, is the controller of all living entities all over the
universe. The body consists of nine gates [two eyes, two nostrils, two



ears, one mouth, the anus and the genitals]. The living entity in his
conditioned stage identifies himself with the body, but when he
identifies himself with the Lord within himself, he becomes just as
free as the Lord, even while in the body." (Svetasvatara Upanisad 3.18)
Therefore, a Krsna conscious person is free from both the outer and
inner activities of the material body.

TEXT 14

na kartrtvam na karmani
lokasya srjati prabhuh
na karma-phala-samyogam
svabhavas tu pravartate

SYNONYMS

na--never; kartrtvam--proprietorship; na--nor; karmani--activities;
lokasya--of the people; srjati--creates; prabhuh--the master of the
city of the body; na--nor; karma-phala--with the results of activities;
samyogam--connection; svabhavah--the modes of material nature; tu--but;
pravartate--act.

TRANSLATION

The embodied spirit, master of the city of his body, does not create
activities, nor does he induce people to act, nor does he create the
fruits of action. All this is enacted by the modes of material nature.

PURPORT

The living entity, as will be explained in the Seventh Chapter, is one
of the energies or natures of the Supreme Lord but is distinct from
matter, which is another nature--called inferior--of the Lord. Somehow
the superior nature, the living entity, has been in contact with
material nature since time immemorial. The temporary body or material
dwelling place which he obtains is the cause of varieties of activities
and their resultant reactions. Living in such a conditional atmosphere,
one suffers the results of the activities of the body by identifying
himself (in ignorance) with the body. It is ignorance acquired from
time immemorial that is the cause of bodily suffering and distress. As
soon as the living entity becomes aloof from the activities of the
body, he becomes free from the reactions as well. As long as he is in
the city of body, he appears to be the master of it, but actually he is
neither its proprietor nor controller of its actions and reactions. He
is simply in the midst of the material ocean, struggling for existence.
The waves of the ocean are tossing him, and he has no control over
them. His best solution is to get out of the water by transcendental
Krsna consciousness. That alone will save him from all turmoil.

TEXT 15

nadatte kasyacit papam
na caiva sukrtam vibhuh
ajnanenavrtam jnanam
tena muhyanti jantavah

SYNONYMS



na--never; adatte--accepts; kasyacit--anyone's; papam--sin; na--nor;
ca--also; eva--certainly; su-krtam--pious activities; vibhuh--the
Supreme Lord; ajnanena--by ignorance; avrtam--covered; jnanam--
knowledge; tena--by that; muhyanti--are bewildered; jantavah--the
living entities.

TRANSLATION

Nor does the Supreme Lord assume anyone's sinful or pious activities.
Embodied beings, however, are bewildered because of the ignorance which
covers their real knowledge.

PURPORT

The Sanskrit word vibhu means the Supreme Lord who is full of unlimited
knowledge, riches, strength, fame, beauty and renunciation. He is
always satisfied in Himself, undisturbed by sinful or pious activities.
He does not create a particular situation for any living entity, but
the living entity, bewildered by ignorance, desires to be put into
certain conditions of life, and thereby his chain of action and
reaction begins. A living entity is, by superior nature, full of
knowledge. Nevertheless, he is prone to be influenced by ignorance due
to his limited power. The Lord is omnipotent, but the living entity is
not. The Lord is vibhu, or omniscient, but the living entity is anu, or
atomic. Because he is a living soul, he has the capacity to desire by
his free will. Such desire is fulfilled only by the omnipotent Lord.
And so, when the living entity is bewildered in his desires, the Lord
allows him to fulfill those desires, but the Lord is never responsible
for the actions and reactions of the particular situation which may be
desired. Being in a bewildered condition, therefore, the embodied soul
identifies himself with the circumstantial material body and becomes
subjected to the temporary misery and happiness of life. The Lord is
the constant companion of the living entity as Paramatma, or the
Supersoul, and therefore He can understand the desires of the
individual soul, as one can smell the flavor of a flower by being near
it. Desire is a subtle form of conditioning for the living entity. The
Lord fulfills his desire as he deserves: Man proposes and God disposes.
The individual is not, therefore, omnipotent in fulfilling his desires.
The Lord, however, can fulfill all desires, and the Lord, being neutral
to everyone, does not interfere with the desires of the minute
independent living entities. However, when one desires Krsna, the Lord
takes special care and encourages one to desire in such a way that one
can attain to Him and be eternally happy. The Vedic hymns therefore
declare:

esa u hy eva sadhu karma karayati tam yam ebhyo lokebhya unninisate.
esa u evasadhu karma karayati yam adho ninisate

"The Lord engages the living entity in pious activities so that he may
be elevated. The Lord engages him in impious activities so that he may
go to hell." (Kausitaki Upanisad 3.8)

ajno jantur aniso 'yam
atmanah sukha-duhkhayoh
isvara-prerito gacchet
svargam vasv abhram eva ca



"The living entity is completely dependent in his distress and
happiness. By the will of the Supreme he can go to heaven or hell, as a
cloud is driven by the air."
Therefore the embodied soul, by his immemorial desire to avoid Krsna
consciousness, causes his own bewilderment. Consequently, although he
is constitutionally eternal, blissful and cognizant, due to the
littleness of his existence he forgets his constitutional position of
service to the Lord and is thus entrapped by nescience. And, under the
spell of ignorance, the living entity claims that the Lord is
responsible for his conditional existence. The Vedanta-sutras (2.1.34)
also confirm this. Vaisamya-nairghrnye na sapeksatvat tatha hi
darsayati: "The Lord neither hates nor likes anyone, though He appears
to."

TEXT 16

jnanena tu tad ajnanam
yesam nasitam atmanah
tesam aditya-vaj jnanam
prakasayati tat param

SYNONYMS

jnanena--by knowledge; tu--but; tat--that; ajnanam--nescience; yesam--
whose; nasitam--is destroyed; atmanah--of the living entity; tesam--
their; aditya-vat--like the rising sun; jnanam--knowledge; prakasayati-
-discloses; tat param--Krsna consciousness.

TRANSLATION

When, however, one is enlightened with the knowledge by which nescience
is destroyed, then his knowledge reveals everything, as the sun lights
up everything in the daytime.

PURPORT

Those who have forgotten Krsna must certainly be bewildered, but those
who are in Krsna consciousness are not bewildered at all. It is stated
in the Bhagavad-gita, sarvam jnana-plavena, jnanagnih sarva-karmani and
na hi jnanena sadrsam. Knowledge is always highly esteemed. And what is
that knowledge? Perfect knowledge is achieved when one surrenders unto
Krsna, as is said in the Seventh Chapter, 19th verse: bahunam janmanam
ante jnanavan mam prapadyate. After passing through many, many births,
when one perfect in knowledge surrenders unto Krsna, or when one
attains Krsna consciousness, then everything is revealed to him, as
everything is revealed by the sun in the daytime. The living entity is
bewildered in so many ways. For instance, when he unceremoniously
thinks himself God, he actually falls into the last snare of nescience.
If a living entity is God, then how can he become bewildered by
nescience? Does God become bewildered by nescience? If so, then
nescience, or Satan, is greater than God. Real knowledge can be
obtained from a person who is in perfect Krsna consciousness.
Therefore, one has to seek out such a bona fide spiritual master and,
under him, learn what Krsna consciousness is, for Krsna consciousness
will certainly drive away all nescience, as the sun drives away
darkness. Even though a person may be in full knowledge that he is not
this body but is transcendental to the body, he still may not be able



to discriminate between the soul and the Supersoul. However, he can
know everything well if he cares to take shelter of the perfect, bona
fide Krsna conscious spiritual master. One can know God and one's
relationship with God only when one actually meets a representative of
God. A representative of God never claims that he is God, although he
is paid all the respect ordinarily paid to God because he has knowledge
of God. One has to learn the distinction between God and the living
entity. Lord Sri Krsna therefore stated in the Second Chapter (2.12)
that every living being is individual and that the Lord also is
individual. They were all individuals in the past, they are individuals
at present, and they will continue to be individuals in the future,
even after liberation. At night we see everything as one in the
darkness, but in day, when the sun is up, we see everything in its real
identity. Identity with individuality in spiritual life is real
knowledge.

TEXT 17

tad-buddhayas tad-atmanas
tan-nisthas tat-parayanah
gacchanty apunar-avrttim
jnana-nirdhuta-kalmasah

SYNONYMS

tat-buddhayah--one whose intelligence is always in the Supreme; tat-
atmanah--one whose mind is always in the Supreme; tat-nisthah--whose
mind is only meant for the Supreme; tat-parayanah--who has completely
taken shelter of Him; gacchanti--go; apunah-avrttim--liberation; jnana-
-knowledge; nirdhuta--cleanses; kalmasah--misgivings.

TRANSLATION

When one's intelligence, mind, faith and refuge are all fixed in the
Supreme, then one becomes fully cleansed of misgivings through complete
knowledge and thus proceeds straight on the path of liberation.

PURPORT

The Supreme Transcendental Truth is Lord Krsna. The whole Bhagavad-gita
centers around the declaration that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. That is the version of all Vedic literature. Para-tattva means
the Supreme Reality, who is understood by the knowers of the Supreme as
Brahman, Paramatma and Bhagavan. Bhagavan, or the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, is the last word in the Absolute. There is nothing more
than that. The Lord says, mattah parataram nanyat kincid asti
dhananjaya. Impersonal Brahman is also supported by Krsna: brahmano hi
pratisthaham. Therefore in all ways Krsna is the Supreme Reality. One
whose mind, intelligence, faith and refuge are always in Krsna, or, in
other words, one who is fully in Krsna consciousness, is undoubtedly
washed clean of all misgivings and is in perfect knowledge in
everything concerning transcendence. A Krsna conscious person can
thoroughly understand that there is duality (simultaneous identity and
individuality) in Krsna, and, equipped with such transcendental
knowledge, one can make steady progress on the path of liberation.

TEXT 18



vidya-vinaya-sampanne
brahmane gavi hastini
suni caiva sva-pake ca
panditah sama-darsinah

SYNONYMS

vidya--education; vinaya--gentleness; sampanne--fully equipped;
brahmane--in the brahmana; gavi--in the cow; hastini--in the elephant;
suni--in the dog; ca--and; eva--certainly; sva-pake--in the dog-eater
(the outcaste); ca--respectively; panditah--those who are so wise;
sama-darsinah--do see with equal vision.

TRANSLATION

The humble sage, by virtue of true knowledge, sees with equal vision a
learned and gentle brahmana, a cow, an elephant, a dog and a dog-eater
[outcaste].

PURPORT

A Krsna conscious person does not make any distinction between species
or castes. The brahmana and the outcaste may be different from the
social point of view, or a dog, a cow, and an elephant may be different
from the point of view of species, but these differences of body are
meaningless from the viewpoint of a learned transcendentalist. This is
due to their relationship to the Supreme, for the Supreme Lord, by His
plenary portion as Paramatma, is present in everyone's heart. Such an
understanding of the Supreme is real knowledge. As far as the bodies
are concerned in different castes or different species of life, the
Lord is equally kind to everyone because He treats every living being
as a friend yet maintains Himself as Paramatma regardless of the
circumstances of the living entities. The Lord as Paramatma is present
in both the outcaste and in the brahmana, although the body of a
brahmana and that of an outcaste are not the same. The bodies are
material productions of different modes of material nature, but the
soul and the Supersoul within the body are of the same spiritual
quality. The similarity in the quality of the soul and the Supersoul,
however, does not make them equal in quantity, for the individual soul
is present only in that particular body whereas the Paramatma is
present in each and every body. A Krsna conscious person has full
knowledge of this, and therefore he is truly learned and has equal
vision. The similar characteristics of the soul and the Supersoul are
that they are both conscious, eternal and blissful. But the difference
is that the individual soul is conscious within the limited
jurisdiction of the body whereas the Supersoul is conscious of all
bodies. The Supersoul is present in all bodies without distinction.

TEXT 19

ihaiva tair jitah sargo
yesam samye sthitam manah
nirdosam hi samam brahma
tasmad brahmani te sthitah

SYNONYMS



iha--in this life; eva--certainly; taih--by them; jitah--conquered;
sargah--birth and death; yesam--of those; samye--in equanimity;
sthitam--so situated; manah--mind; nirdosam--flawless; hi--certainly;
samam--in equanimity; brahma--the Supreme; tasmat--therefore; brahmani-
-in the Supreme; te--they; sthitah--are situated.

TRANSLATION

Those whose minds are established in sameness and equanimity have
already conquered the conditions of birth and death. They are flawless
like Brahman, and thus they are already situated in Brahman.

PURPORT

Equanimity of mind, as mentioned above, is the sign of self-
realization. Those who have actually attained to such a stage should be
considered to have conquered material conditions, specifically birth
and death. As long as one identifies with this body, he is considered a
conditioned soul, but as soon as he is elevated to the stage of
equanimity through realization of self, he is liberated from
conditional life. In other words, he is no longer subject to take birth
in the material world but can enter into the spiritual sky after his
death. The Lord is flawless because He is without attraction or hatred.
Similarly, when a living entity is without attraction or hatred, he
also becomes flawless and eligible to enter into the spiritual sky.
Such persons are to be considered already liberated, and their symptoms
are described below.

TEXT 20

na prahrsyet priyam prapya
nodvijet prapya capriyam
sthira-buddhir asammudho
brahma-vid brahmani sthitah

SYNONYMS

na--never; prahrsyet--rejoice; priyam--pleasant; prapya--achieving; na-
-does not; udvijet--agitated; prapya--obtaining; ca--also; apriyam--
unpleasant; sthira-buddhih--self-intelligent; asammudhah--unbewildered;
brahma-vit--one who knows the Supreme perfectly; brahmani--in the
transcendence; sthitah--situated.

TRANSLATION

A person who neither rejoices upon achieving something pleasant nor
laments upon obtaining something unpleasant, who is self-intelligent,
unbewildered, and who knows the science of God, is to be understood as
already situated in transcendence.

PURPORT

The symptoms of the self-realized person are given herein. The first
symptom is that he is not illusioned by the false identification of the
body with his true self. He knows perfectly well that he is not this
body, but is the fragmental portion of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. He is therefore not joyful in achieving something, nor does he
lament in losing anything which is related to his body. This steadiness



of mind is called sthira-buddhi, or self-intelligence. He is therefore
never bewildered by mistaking the gross body for the soul, nor does he
accept the body as permanent and disregard the existence of the soul.
This knowledge elevates him to the station of knowing the complete
science of the Absolute Truth, namely Brahman, Paramatma and Bhagavan.
He thus knows his constitutional position perfectly well, without
falsely trying to become one with the Supreme in all respects. This is
called Brahman realization, or self-realization. Such steady
consciousness is called Krsna consciousness.

TEXT 21

bahya-sparsesv asaktatma
vindaty atmani yat sukham
sa brahma-yoga-yuktatma
sukham aksayam asnute

SYNONYMS

bahya-sparsesu--in external sense pleasure; asakta-atma--one who is not
so attached; vindati--enjoys; atmani--in the self; yat--that which;
sukham--happiness; sah--that; brahma-yoga--concentrated in Brahman;
yukta-atma--self-connected; sukham--happiness; aksayam--unlimited;
asnute--enjoys.

TRANSLATION

Such a liberated person is not attracted to material sense pleasure or
external objects but is always in trance, enjoying the pleasure within.
In this way the self-realized person enjoys unlimited happiness, for he
concentrates on the Supreme.

PURPORT

Sri Yamunacarya, a great devotee in Krsna consciousness, said:

yad-avadhi mama cetah krsna-padaravinde
nava-nava-rasa-dhamany udyatam rantum asit
tad-avadhi bata nari-sangame smaryamane
bhavati mukha-vikarah susthu nisthivanam ca

"Since I have been engaged in the transcendental loving service of
Krsna, realizing ever-new pleasure in Him, whenever I think of sex
pleasure, I spit at the thought, and my lips curl with distaste." A
person in brahma-yoga, or Krsna consciousness, is so absorbed in the
loving service of the Lord that he loses his taste for material sense
pleasure altogether. The highest pleasure in terms of matter is sex
pleasure. The whole world is moving under its spell, and a materialist
cannot work at all without this motivation. But a person engaged in
Krsna consciousness can work with greater vigor without sex pleasure,
which he avoids. That is the test in spiritual realization. Spiritual
realization and sex pleasure go ill together. A Krsna conscious person
is not attracted to any kind of sense pleasure due to his being a
liberated soul.

TEXT 22

ye hi samsparsa-ja bhoga



duhkha-yonaya eva te
ady-antavantah kaunteya
na tesu ramate budhah

SYNONYMS

ye--those; hi--certainly; samsparsa-jah--by contact with the material
senses; bhogah--enjoyments; duhkha--distress; yonayah--sources of; eva-
-certainly; te--they are; adi--beginning; anta--end; vantah--subject
to; kaunteya--O son of Kunti; na--never; tesu--in those; ramate--takes
delight; budhah--the intelligent person.

TRANSLATION

An intelligent person does not take part in the sources of misery,
which are due to contact with the material senses. O son of Kunti, such
pleasures have a beginning and an end, and so the wise man does not
delight in them.

PURPORT

Material sense pleasures are due to the contact of the material senses,
which are all temporary because the body itself is temporary. A
liberated soul is not interested in anything which is temporary.
Knowing well the joys of transcendental pleasures, how can a liberated
soul agree to enjoy false pleasure? In the Padma Purana it is said:

ramante yogino 'nante
satyanande cid-atmani
iti rama-padenasau
param brahmabhidhiyate

"The mystics derive unlimited transcendental pleasures from the
Absolute Truth, and therefore the Supreme Absolute Truth, the
Personality of Godhead, is also known as Rama."
In the Srimad-Bhagavatam also (5.5.1) it is said:

nayam deho deha-bhajam nr-loke
kastan kaman arhate vid-bhujam ye
tapo divyam putraka yena sattvam
suddhyed yasmad brahma-saukhyam tv anantam

"My dear sons, there is no reason to labor very hard for sense pleasure
while in this human form of life; such pleasures are available to the
stool-eaters [hogs]. Rather, you should undergo penances in this life
by which your existence will be purified, and, as a result, you will be
able to enjoy unlimited transcendental bliss."
Therefore, those who are true yogis or learned transcendentalists are
not attracted by sense pleasures, which are the causes of continuous
material existence. The more one is addicted to material pleasures, the
more he is entrapped by material miseries.

TEXT 23

saknotihaiva yah sodhum
prak sarira-vimoksanat
kama-krodhodbhavam vegam
sa yuktah sa sukhi narah



SYNONYMS

saknoti--able to do; iha eva--in the present body; yah--one who;
sodhum--to tolerate; prak--before; sarira--body; vimoksanat--give up;
kama--desire; krodha--anger; udbhavam--generated from; vegam--urge;
sah--he; yuktah--in trance; sah--he; sukhi--happy; narah--human being.

TRANSLATION

Before giving up this present body, if one is able to tolerate the
urges of the material senses and check the force of desire and anger,
he is a yogi and is happy in this world.

PURPORT

If one wants to make steady progress on the path of self-realization,
he must try to control the forces of the material senses. There are the
forces of talk, forces of anger, forces of mind, forces of the stomach,
forces of the genitals, and forces of the tongue. One who is able to
control the forces of all these different senses, and the mind, is
called gosvami, or svami. Such gosvamis live strictly controlled lives,
and forgo altogether the forces of the senses. Material desires, when
unsatiated, generate anger, and thus the mind, eyes and chest become
agitated. Therefore, one must practice to control them before one gives
up this material body. One who can do this is understood to be self-
realized and is thus happy in the state of self-realization. It is the
duty of the transcendentalist to try strenuously to control desire and
anger.

TEXT 24

yo 'ntah-sukho 'ntar-aramas
tathantar-jyotir eva yah
sa yogi brahma-nirvanam
brahma-bhuto 'dhigacchati

SYNONYMS

yah--one who; antah-sukhah--happy from within; antah-aramah--active
within; tatha--as well as; antah-jyotih--aiming within; eva--certainly;
yah--anyone; sah--he; yogi--mystic; brahma-nirvanam--liberated in the
Supreme; brahma-bhutah--self-realized; adhigacchati--attains.

TRANSLATION

One whose happiness is within, who is active within, who rejoices
within and is illumined within, is actually the perfect mystic. He is
liberated in the Supreme, and ultimately he attains the Supreme.

PURPORT

Unless one is able to relish happiness from within, how can one retire
from the external engagements meant for deriving superficial happiness?
A liberated person enjoys happiness by factual experience. He can,
therefore, sit silently at any place and enjoy the activities of life
from within. Such a liberated person no longer desires external



material happiness. This state is called brahma-bhuta, attaining which
one is assured of going back to Godhead, back to home.

TEXT 25

labhante brahma-nirvanam
rsayah ksina-kalmasah
chinna-dvaidha yatatmanah
sarva-bhuta-hite ratah

SYNONYMS

labhante--achieve; brahma-nirvanam--liberation in the Supreme; rsayah--
those who are active within; ksina-kalmasah--who are devoid of all
sins; chinna--torn off; dvaidhah--duality; yata-atmanah--engaged in
self-realization; sarva-bhuta--in all living entities; hite--in welfare
work; ratah--engaged.

TRANSLATION

One who is beyond duality and doubt, whose mind is engaged within, who
is always busy working for the welfare of all sentient beings, and who
is free from all sins, achieves liberation in the Supreme.

PURPORT

Only a person who is fully in Krsna consciousness can be said to be
engaged in welfare work for all living entities. When a person is
actually in the knowledge that Krsna is the fountainhead of everything,
then when he acts in that spirit he acts for everyone. The sufferings
of humanity are due to forgetfulness of Krsna as the supreme enjoyer,
the supreme proprietor, and the supreme friend. Therefore, to act to
revive this consciousness within the entire human society is the
highest welfare work. One cannot be engaged in first-class welfare work
without being liberated in the Supreme. A Krsna conscious person has no
doubt about the supremacy of Krsna. He has no doubt because he is
completely freed from all sins. This is the state of divine love.
A person engaged only in ministering to the physical welfare of human
society cannot factually help anyone. Temporary relief of the external
body and the mind is not satisfactory. The real cause of one's
difficulties in the hard struggle for life may be found in one's
forgetfulness of his relationship with the Supreme Lord. When a man is
fully conscious of his relationship with Krsna, he is actually a
liberated soul, although he may be in the material tabernacle.

TEXT 26

kama-krodha-vimuktanam
yatinam yata-cetasam
abhito brahma-nirvanam
vartate viditatmanam

SYNONYMS

kama--desires; krodha--anger; vimuktanam--of those who are so
liberated; yatinam--of the saintly persons; yata-cetasam--of persons
who have full control over the mind; abhitah--assured in the near



future; brahma-nirvanam--liberation in the Supreme; vartate--is there;
vidita-atmanam--of those who are self-realized.

TRANSLATION

Those who are free from anger and all material desires, who are self-
realized, self-disciplined and constantly endeavoring for perfection,
are assured of liberation in the Supreme in the very near future.

PURPORT

Of the saintly persons who are constantly engaged in striving toward
salvation, one who is in Krsna consciousness is the best of all. The
Bhagavatam (4.22.39) confirms this fact as follows:

yat-pada-pankaja-palasa-vilasa-bhaktya
karmasayam grathitam udgrathayanti santah
tadvan na rikta-matayo yatayo 'pi ruddha-
sroto-ganas tam aranam bhaja vasudevam

"Just try to worship, in devotional service, Vasudeva, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Even great sages are not able to control the
forces of the senses as effectively as those who are engaged in
transcendental bliss by serving the lotus feet of the Lord, uprooting
the deep grown desire for fruitive activities."
In the conditioned soul the desire to enjoy the fruitive results of
work is so deep-rooted that it is very difficult even for the great
sages to control such desires, despite great endeavors. A devotee of
the Lord, constantly engaged in devotional service in Krsna
consciousness, perfect in self-realization, very quickly attains
liberation in the Supreme. Owing to his complete knowledge in self-
realization, he always remains in trance. To cite an analogous example
of this:

darsana-dhyana-samsparsair
matsya-kurma-vihangamah
svany apatyani pusnanti
tathaham api padma-ja

"By vision, by meditation and by touch only do the fish, the tortoise
and the birds maintain their offspring. Similarly do I also, O
Padmaja!"
The fish brings up its offspring simply by looking at them. The
tortoise brings up its offspring simply by meditation. The eggs of the
tortoise are laid on land, and the tortoise meditates on the eggs while
in the water. Similarly, a devotee in Krsna consciousness, although far
away from the Lord's abode, can elevate himself to that abode simply by
thinking of Him constantly--by engagement in Krsna consciousness. He
does not feel the pangs of material miseries; this state of life is
called brahma-nirvana, or the absence of material miseries due to being
constantly immersed in the Supreme.

TEXTS 27-28

sparsan krtva bahir bahyams
caksus caivantare bhruvoh
pranapanau samau krtva
nasabhyantara-carinau



yatendriya-mano-buddhir
munir moksa-parayanah
vigateccha-bhaya-krodho
yah sada mukta eva sah

SYNONYMS

sparsan--external sense objects, such as sound, etc.; krtva--keeping;
bahih--external; bahyan--unnecessary; caksuh--eyes; ca--also; eva--
certainly; antare--within; bhruvoh--of the eyebrows; prana-apanau--up-
and down-moving air; samau--in suspension; krtva--doing so; nasa-
abhyantara--within the nostrils; carinau--blowing; yata--controlled;
indriya--senses; manah--mind; buddhih--intelligence; munih--the
transcendentalist; moksa--liberation; parayanah--being so destined;
vigata--discarded; iccha--wishes; bhaya--fear; krodhah--anger; yah--one
who; sada--always; muktah--liberated; eva--certainly; sah--he is.

TRANSLATION

Shutting out all external sense objects, keeping the eyes and vision
concentrated between the two eyebrows, suspending the inward and
outward breaths within the nostrils--thus controlling the mind, senses
and intelligence, the transcendentalist becomes free from desire, fear
and anger. One who is always in this state is certainly liberated.

PURPORT

Being engaged in Krsna consciousness, one can immediately understand
one's spiritual identity, and then one can understand the Supreme Lord
by means of devotional service. When he is well situated in devotional
service, one comes to the transcendental position, qualified to feel
the presence of the Lord in the sphere of one's activity. This
particular position is called liberation in the Supreme.
After explaining the above principles of liberation in the Supreme, the
Lord gives instruction to Arjuna as to how one can come to that
position by the practice of the mysticism or yoga, known as astanga-
yoga, which is divisible into an eightfold procedure called yama,
niyama, asana, pranayama, pratyahara, dharana, dhyana, and samadhi. In
the Sixth Chapter the subject of yoga is explicitly detailed, and at
the end of the Fifth it is only preliminarily explained. One has to
drive out the sense objects such as sound, touch, form, taste and smell
by the pratyahara (breathing) process in yoga, and then keep the vision
of the eyes between the two eyebrows and concentrate on the tip of the
nose with half closed lids. There is no benefit in closing the eyes
altogether, because then there is every chance of falling asleep. Nor
is there benefit in opening the eyes completely, because then there is
the hazard of being attracted by sense objects. The breathing movement
is restrained within the nostrils by neutralizing the up- and down-
moving air within the body. By practice of such yoga one is able to
gain control over the senses, refrain from outward sense objects, and
thus prepare oneself for liberation in the Supreme.
This yoga process helps one become free from all kinds of fear and
anger and thus feel the presence of the Supersoul in the transcendental
situation. In other words, Krsna consciousness is the easiest process
of executing yoga principles. This will be thoroughly explained in the
next chapter. A Krsna conscious person, however, being always engaged
in devotional service, does not risk losing his senses to some other



engagement. This is a better way of controlling the senses than by the
astanga-yoga.

TEXT 29

bhoktaram yajna-tapasam
sarva-loka-mahesvaram
suhrdam sarva-bhutanam
jnatva mam santim rcchati

SYNONYMS

bhoktaram--beneficiary; yajna--sacrifices; tapasam--of penances and
austerities; sarva-loka--all planets and the demigods thereof; maha-
isvaram--the Supreme Lord; su-hrdam--benefactor; sarva--all; bhutanam--
of the living entities; jnatva--thus knowing; mam--Me (Lord Krsna);
santim--relief from material pangs; rcchati--achieves.

TRANSLATION

The sages, knowing Me as the ultimate purpose of all sacrifices and
austerities, the Supreme Lord of all planets and demigods and the
benefactor and well-wisher of all living entities, attain peace from
the pangs of material miseries.

PURPORT

The conditioned souls within the clutches of illusory energy are all
anxious to attain peace in the material world. But they do not know the
formula for peace, which is explained in this part of the Bhagavad-
gita. The greatest peace formula is simply this: Lord Krsna is the
beneficiary in all human activities. Men should offer everything to the
transcendental service of the Lord because He is the proprietor of all
planets and the demigods thereon. No one is greater than He. He is
greater than the greatest of the demigods, Lord Siva and Lord Brahma.
In the Vedas (Svetasvatara Upanisad 6.7) the Supreme Lord is described
as tam isvaranam paramam mahesvaram. Under the spell of illusion,
living entities are trying to be lords of all they survey, but actually
they are dominated by the material energy of the Lord. The Lord is the
master of material nature, and the conditioned souls are under the
stringent rules of material nature. Unless one understands these bare
facts, it is not possible to achieve peace in the world either
individually or collectively. This is the sense of Krsna consciousness:
Lord Krsna is the supreme predominator, and all living entities,
including the great demigods, are His subordinates. One can attain
perfect peace only in complete Krsna consciousness.
This Fifth Chapter is a practical explanation of Krsna consciousness,
generally known as karma-yoga. The question of mental speculation as to
how karma-yoga can give liberation is answered herewith. To work in
Krsna consciousness is to work with the complete knowledge of the Lord
as the predominator. Such work is not different from transcendental
knowledge. Direct Krsna consciousness is bhakti-yoga, and jnana-yoga is
a path leading to bhakti-yoga. Krsna consciousness means to work in
full knowledge of one's relationship with the Supreme Absolute, and the
perfection of this consciousness is full knowledge of Krsna, or the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. A pure soul is the eternal servant of
God as His fragmental part and parcel. He comes into contact with maya
(illusion) due to the desire to lord it over maya, and that is the



cause of his many sufferings. As long as he is in contact with matter,
he has to execute work in terms of material necessities. Krsna
consciousness, however, brings one into spiritual life even while one
is within the jurisdiction of matter, for it is an arousing of
spiritual existence by practice in the material world. The more one is
advanced, the more he is freed from the clutches of matter. The Lord is
not partial toward anyone. Everything depends on one's practical
performance of duties in an effort to control the senses and conquer
the influence of desire and anger. And, attaining Krsna consciousness
by controlling the above-mentioned passions, one remains factually in
the transcendental stage, or brahma-nirvana. The eightfold yoga
mysticism is automatically practiced in Krsna consciousness because the
ultimate purpose is served. There is a gradual process of elevation in
the practice of yama, niyama, asana, pratyahara, dhyana, dharana,
pranayama, and samadhi. But these only preface perfection by devotional
service, which alone can award peace to the human being. It is the
highest perfection of life.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Fifth Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of  Karma-yoga, or Action in Krsna
Consciousness.

Chapter 6
Sankhya-yoga

TEXT 1

sri-bhagavan uvaca
anasritah karma-phalam
karyam karma karoti yah
sa sannyasi ca yogi ca
na niragnir na cakriyah

SYNONYMS

sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Lord said; anasritah--without shelter; karma-
phalam--the result of work; karyam--obligatory; karma--work; karoti--
performs; yah--one who; sah--he; sannyasi--in the renounced order; ca--
also; yogi--mystic; ca--also; na--not; nih--without; agnih--fire; na--
nor; ca--also; akriyah--without duty.

TRANSLATION

The Blessed Lord said: One who is unattached to the fruits of his work
and who works as he is obligated is in the renounced order of life, and
he is the true mystic: not he who lights no fire and performs no work.

PURPORT

In this chapter the Lord explains that the process of the eightfold
yoga system is a means to control the mind and the senses. However,
this is very difficult for people in general to perform, especially in
the Age of Kali. Although the eightfold yoga system is recommended in
this chapter, the Lord emphasizes that the process of karma-yoga, or
acting in Krsna consciousness, is better. Everyone acts in this world
to maintain his family and their paraphernalia, but no one is working
without some self-interest, some personal gratification, be it
concentrated or extended. The criterion of perfection is to act in



Krsna consciousness, and not with a view to enjoying the fruits of
work. To act in Krsna consciousness is the duty of every living entity
because all are constitutionally parts and parcels of the Supreme. The
parts of the body work for the satisfaction of the whole body. The
limbs of the body do not act for self-satisfaction but for the
satisfaction of the complete whole. Similarly, the living entity who
acts for satisfaction of the supreme whole and not for personal
satisfaction is the perfect sannyasi, the perfect yogi.
The sannyasis sometimes artificially think that they have become
liberated from all material duties, and therefore they cease to perform
agnihotra yajnas (fire sacrifices), but actually they are self-
interested because their goal is becoming one with the impersonal
Brahman. Such a desire is greater than any material desire, but it is
not without self-interest. Similarly, the mystic yogi who practices the
yoga system with half-open eyes, ceasing all material activities,
desires some satisfaction for his personal self. But a person acting in
Krsna consciousness works for the satisfaction of the whole, without
self-interest. A Krsna conscious person has no desire for self-
satisfaction. His criterion of success is the satisfaction of Krsna,
and thus he is the perfect sannyasi, or perfect yogi. Lord Caitanya,
the highest perfectional symbol of renunciation, prays in this way:

na dhanam na janam na sundarim
kavitam va jagad-isa kamaye
mama janmani janmanisvare
bhavatad bhaktir ahaituki tvayi

"O Almighty Lord, I have no desire to accumulate wealth, nor to enjoy
beautiful women. Nor do I want any number of followers. What I want
only is the causeless mercy of Your devotional service in my life,
birth after birth."

TEXT 2

yam sannyasam iti prahur
yogam tam viddhi pandava
na hy asannyasta-sankalpo
yogi bhavati kascana

SYNONYMS

yam--what; sannyasam--renunciation; iti--thus; prahuh--they say; yogam-
-linking with the Supreme; tam--that; viddhi--you must know; pandava--O
son of Pandu; na--never; hi--certainly; asannyasta--without giving up;
sankalpah--self-satisfaction; yogi--a mystic transcendentalist;
bhavati--becomes; kascana--anyone.

TRANSLATION

What is called renunciation is the same as yoga, or linking oneself
with the Supreme, for no one can become a yogi unless he renounces the
desire for sense gratification.

PURPORT

Real sannyasa-yoga or bhakti means that one should know his
constitutional position as the living entity, and act accordingly. The
living entity has no separate independent identity. He is the marginal



energy of the Supreme. When he is entrapped by material energy, he is
conditioned, and when he is Krsna conscious, or aware of the spiritual
energy, then he is in his real and natural state of life. Therefore,
when one is in complete knowledge, one ceases all material sense
gratification, or renounces all kinds of sense gratificatory
activities. This is practiced by the yogis who restrain the senses from
material attachment. But a person in Krsna consciousness has no
opportunity to engage his senses in anything which is not for the
purpose of Krsna. Therefore, a Krsna conscious person is simultaneously
a sannyasi and a yogi. The purpose of knowledge and of restraining the
senses, as prescribed in the jnana and yoga processes, is automatically
served in Krsna consciousness. If one is unable to give up the
activities of his selfish nature, then jnana and yoga are of no avail.
The real aim is for a living entity to give up all selfish satisfaction
and to be prepared to satisfy the Supreme. A Krsna conscious person has
no desire for any kind of self-enjoyment. He is always engaged for the
enjoyment of the Supreme. One who has no information of the Supreme
must therefore be engaged in self-satisfaction, because no one can
stand on the platform of inactivity. All purposes are perfectly served
by the practice of Krsna consciousness.

TEXT 3

aruruksor muner yogam
karma karanam ucyate
yogarudhasya tasyaiva
samah karanam ucyate

SYNONYMS

aruruksoh--of one who has just begun yoga; muneh--of the sage; yogam--
the eightfold yoga system; karma--work; karanam--the cause; ucyate--is
said to be; yoga--eightfold yoga; arudhasya--of one who has attained;
tasya--his; eva--certainly; samah--cessation of all material
activities; karanam--the cause; ucyate--is said to be.

TRANSLATION

For one who is a neophyte in the eightfold yoga system, work is said to
be the means; and for one who has already attained to yoga, cessation
of all material activities is said to be the means.

PURPORT

The process of linking oneself with the Supreme is called yoga, which
may be compared to a ladder for attaining the topmost spiritual
realization. This ladder begins from the lowest material condition of
the living entity and rises up to perfect self-realization in pure
spiritual life. According to various elevations, different parts of the
ladder are known by different names. But all in all, the complete
ladder is called yoga and may be divided into three parts, namely
jnana-yoga, dhyana-yoga and bhakti-yoga. The beginning of the ladder is
called the yogaruruksu stage, and the highest rung is called yogarudha.
Concerning the eightfold yoga system, attempts in the beginning to
enter into meditation through regulative principles of life and
practice of different sitting postures (which are more or less bodily
exercises) are considered fruitive material activities. All such
activities lead to achieving perfect mental equilibrium to control the



senses. When one is accomplished in the practice of meditation, he
ceases all disturbing mental activities.
A Krsna conscious person is, however, situated from the beginning on
the platform of meditation because he always thinks of Krsna. And,
being constantly engaged in the service of Krsna, he is considered to
have ceased all material activities.

TEXT 4

yada hi nendriyarthesu
na karmasv anusajjate
sarva-sankalpa-sannyasi
yogarudhas tadocyate

SYNONYMS

yada--when; hi--certainly; na--not; indriya-arthesu--in sense
gratification; na--never; karmasu--in fruitive activities; anusajjate--
does necessarily engage; sarva-sankalpa--all material desires;
sannyasi--renouncer; yoga-arudhah--elevated in yoga; tada--at that
time; ucyate--is said to be.

TRANSLATION

A person is said to be have attained to yoga when, having renounced all
material desires, he neither acts for sense gratification nor engages
in fruitive activities.

PURPORT

When a person is fully engaged in the transcendental loving service of
the Lord, he is pleased in himself, and thus he is no longer engaged in
sense gratification or in fruitive activities. Otherwise, one must be
engaged in sense gratification, since one cannot live without
engagement. Without Krsna consciousness, one must be always seeking
self-centered or extended selfish activities. But a Krsna conscious
person can do everything for the satisfaction of Krsna and thereby be
perfectly detached from sense gratification. One who has no such
realization must mechanically try to escape material desires before
being elevated to the top rung of the yoga ladder.

TEXT 5

uddhared atmanatmanam
natmanam avasadayet
atmaiva hy atmano bandhur
atmaiva ripur atmanah

SYNONYMS

uddharet--one must deliver; atmana--by the mind; atmanam--the
conditioned soul; na--never; atmanam--the conditioned soul; avasadayet-
-put into degradation; atma--mind; eva--certainly; hi--indeed; atmanah-
-of the conditioned soul; bandhuh--friend; atma--mind; eva--certainly;
ripuh--enemy; atmanah--of the conditioned soul.

TRANSLATION



A man must elevate himself by his own mind, not degrade himself. The
mind is the friend of the conditioned soul, and his enemy as well.

PURPORT

The word atma denotes body, mind and soul--depending upon different
circumstances. In the yoga system, the mind and the conditioned soul
are especially important. Since the mind is the central point of yoga
practice, atma refers here to the mind. The purpose of the yoga system
is to control the mind and to draw it away from attachment to sense
objects. It is stressed herein that the mind must be so trained that it
can deliver the conditioned soul from the mire of nescience. In
material existence one is subjected to the influence of the mind and
the senses. In fact, the pure soul is entangled in the material world
because of the mind's ego which desires to lord it over material
nature. Therefore, the mind should be trained so that it will not be
attracted by the glitter of material nature, and in this way the
conditioned soul may be saved. One should not degrade oneself by
attraction to sense objects. The more one is attracted by sense
objects, the more one becomes entangled in material existence. The best
way to disentangle oneself is to always engage the mind in Krsna
consciousness. The word hi is used for emphasizing this point, i.e.,
that one must do this. It is also said:

mana eva manusyanam
karanam bandha-moksayoh
bandhaya visayasango
muktyai nirvisayam manah

"For man, mind is the cause of bondage and mind is the cause of
liberation. Mind absorbed in sense objects is the cause of bondage, and
mind detached from the sense objects is the cause of liberation."
(Amrta-bindu Upanisad 2) Therefore, the mind which is always engaged in
Krsna consciousness is the cause of supreme liberation.

TEXT 6

bandhur atmatmanas tasya
yenatmaivatmana jitah
anatmanas tu satrutve
vartetatmaiva satru-vat

SYNONYMS

bandhuh--friend; atma--mind; atmanah--of the living entity; tasya--of
him; yena--by whom; atma--mind; eva--certainly; atmana--by the living
entity; jitah--conquered; anatmanah--of one who has failed to control
the mind; tu--but; satrutve--because of enmity; varteta--remains; atma
eva--the very mind; satru-vat--as an enemy.

TRANSLATION

For him who has conquered the mind, the mind is the best of friends;
but for one who has failed to do so, his very mind will be the greatest
enemy.

PURPORT



The purpose of practicing eightfold yoga is to control the mind in
order to make it a friend in discharging the human mission. Unless the
mind is controlled, the practice of yoga (for show) is simply a waste
of time. One who cannot control his mind lives always with the greatest
enemy, and thus his life and its mission are spoiled. The
constitutional position of the living entity is to carry out the order
of the superior. As long as one's mind remains an unconquered enemy,
one has to serve the dictations of lust, anger, avarice, illusion, etc.
But when the mind is conquered, one voluntarily agrees to abide by the
dictation of the Personality of Godhead, who is situated within the
heart of everyone as Paramatma. Real yoga practice entails meeting the
Paramatma within the heart and then following His dictation. For one
who takes to Krsna consciousness directly, perfect surrender to the
dictation of the Lord follows automatically.

TEXT 7

jitatmanah prasantasya
paramatma samahitah
sitosna-sukha-duhkhesu
tatha manapamanayoh

SYNONYMS

jita-atmanah--of one who has conquered his mind; prasantasya--of who
has attained tranquillity by such control over the mind; parama-atma--
the Supersoul; samahitah--approached completely; sita--cold; usna--
heat; sukha--in happiness; duhkhesu--in distress; tatha--also; mana--
honor; apamanayoh--and dishonor.

TRANSLATION

For one who has conquered the mind, the Supersoul is already reached,
for he has attained tranquillity. To such a man happiness and distress,
heat and cold, honor and dishonor are all the same.

PURPORT

Actually, every living entity is intended to abide by the dictation of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is seated in everyone's heart
as Paramatma. When the mind is misled by the external illusory energy,
one becomes entangled in material activities. Therefore, as soon as
one's mind is controlled through one of the yoga systems, one is to be
considered as having already reached the destination. One has to abide
by superior dictation. When one's mind is fixed on the superior nature,
he has no other alternative but to follow the dictation of the Supreme.
The mind must admit some superior dictation and follow it. The effect
of controlling the mind is that one automatically follows the dictation
of the Paramatma or Supersoul. Because this transcendental position is
at once achieved by one who is in Krsna consciousness, the devotee of
the Lord is unaffected by the dualities of material existence, namely
distress and happiness, cold and heat, etc. This state is practical
samadhi, or absorption in the Supreme.

TEXT 8

jnana-vijnana-trptatma
kuta-stho vijitendriyah



yukta ity ucyate yogi
sama-lostrasma-kancanah

SYNONYMS

jnana--acquired knowledge; vijnana--realized knowledge; trpta--
satisfied; atma--living entity; kuta-sthah--spiritually situated;
vijita-indriyah--sensually controlled; yuktah--competent for self-
realization; iti--thus; ucyate--is said; yogi--the mystic; sama--
equipoised; lostra--pebbles; asma--stone; kancanah--gold.

TRANSLATION

A person is said to be established in self-realization and is called a
yogi [or mystic] when he is fully satisfied by virtue of acquired
knowledge and realization. Such a person is situated in transcendence
and is self-controlled. He sees everything--whether it be pebbles,
stones or gold--as the same.

PURPORT

Book knowledge without realization of the Supreme Truth is useless.
This is stated as follows:

atah sri-krsna-namadi
na bhaved grahyam indriyaih
sevonmukhe hi jihvadau
svayam eva sphuraty adah

"No one can understand the transcendental nature of the name, form,
quality and pastimes of Sri Krsna through his materially contaminated
senses. Only when one becomes spiritually saturated by transcendental
service to the Lord are the transcendental name, form, quality and
pastimes of the Lord revealed to him." (Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu 1.2.234)
This Bhagavad-gita is the science of Krsna consciousness. No one can
become Krsna conscious simply by mundane scholarship. One must be
fortunate enough to associate with a person who is in pure
consciousness. A Krsna conscious person has realized knowledge, by the
grace of Krsna, because he is satisfied with pure devotional service.
By realized knowledge, one becomes perfect. By transcendental knowledge
one can remain steady in his convictions, but by mere academic
knowledge one can be easily deluded and confused by apparent
contradictions. It is the realized soul who is actually self-controlled
because he is surrendered to Krsna. He is transcendental because he has
nothing to do with mundane scholarship. For him mundane scholarship and
mental speculation, which may be as good as gold to others, are of no
greater value than pebbles or stones.

TEXT 9

suhrn-mitrary-udasina-
madhyastha-dvesya-bandhusu
sadhusv api ca papesu
sama-buddhir visisyate

SYNONYMS



su-hrt--by nature a well-wisher; mitra--benefactor with affection; ari-
-enemy; udasina--neutral between belligerents; madhya-stha--mediator
between the belligerents; dvesya--envious; bandhusu--among relatives or
well-wishers; sadhusu--unto the pious; api--as well as; ca--and;
papesu--unto the sinners; sama-buddhih--having equal intelligence;
visisyate--is far advanced.

TRANSLATION

A person is said to be still further advanced when he regards all--the
honest well-wisher, friends and enemies, the envious,  the pious, the
sinner and those who are indifferent and impartial--with an equal mind.

TEXT 10

yogi yunjita satatam
atmanam rahasi sthitah
ekaki yata-cittatma
nirasir aparigrahah

SYNONYMS

yogi--a transcendentalist; yunjita--must concentrate in Krsna
consciousness; satatam--constantly; atmanam--himself (by the body, mind
and self); rahasi--in a secluded place; sthitah--being so situated;
ekaki--alone; yata-citta-atma--always careful in mind; nirasih--without
being attracted by anything else; aparigrahah--free from the feeling of
possessiveness.

TRANSLATION

A transcendentalist should always try to concentrate his mind on the
Supreme Self; he should live alone in a secluded place and should
always carefully control his mind. He should be free from desires and
feelings of possessiveness.

PURPORT

Krsna is realized in different degrees as Brahman, Paramatma and the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Krsna consciousness means, concisely,
to be always engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord.
But those who are attached to the impersonal Brahman or the localized
Supersoul are also partially Krsna conscious, because impersonal
Brahman is the spiritual ray of Krsna and Supersoul is the all-
pervading partial expansion of Krsna. Thus the impersonalist and the
meditator are also indirectly Krsna conscious. A directly Krsna
conscious person is the topmost transcendentalist because such a
devotee knows what is meant by Brahman or Paramatma. His knowledge of
the Absolute Truth is perfect, whereas the impersonalist and the
meditative yogi are imperfectly Krsna conscious.
Nevertheless, all of these are instructed herewith to be constantly
engaged in their particular pursuits so that they may come to the
highest perfection sooner or later. The first business of a
transcendentalist is to keep the mind always on Krsna. One should
always think of Krsna and not forget Him even for a moment.
Concentration of the mind on the Supreme is called samadhi, or trance.
In order to concentrate the mind, one should always remain in seclusion
and avoid disturbance by external objects. He should be very careful to



accept favorable and reject unfavorable conditions that affect his
realization. And, in perfect determination, he should not hanker after
unnecessary material things that entangle him by feelings of
possessiveness.
All these perfections and precautions are perfectly executed when one
is directly in Krsna consciousness, because direct Krsna consciousness
means self-abnegation, wherein there is very little chance for material
possessiveness. Srila Rupa Gosvami characterizes Krsna consciousness in
this way:

anasaktasya visayan
yatharham upayunjatah
nirbandhah krsna-sambandhe
yuktam vairagyam ucyate

prapancikataya buddhya
hari-sambandhi-vastunah
mumuksubhih parityago
vairagyam phalgu kathyate

"When one is not attached to anything, but at the same time accepts
everything in relation to Krsna, one is rightly situated above
possessiveness. On the other hand, one who rejects everything without
knowledge of its relationship to Krsna is not as complete in his
renunciation." (Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu 2.255-256)
A Krsna conscious person well knows that everything belongs to Krsna,
and thus he is always free from feelings of personal possession. As
such, he has no hankering for anything on his own personal account. He
knows how to accept things in favor of Krsna consciousness and how to
reject things unfavorable to Krsna consciousness. He is always aloof
from material things because he is always transcendental, and he is
always alone, having nothing to do with persons not in Krsna
consciousness. Therefore a person in Krsna consciousness is the perfect
yogi.

TEXTS 11-12

sucau dese pratisthapya
sthiram asanam atmanah
naty-ucchritam nati-nicam
cailajina-kusottaram

tatraikagram manah krtva
yata-cittendriya-kriyah
upavisyasane yunjyad
yogam atma-visuddhaye

SYNONYMS

sucau--in a sanctified; dese--in the land; pratisthapya--placing;
sthiram--firm; asanam--seat; atmanah--self-dependent; na--not; ati--
too; ucchritam--high; na--nor; ati--too; nicam--low; caila-ajina--soft
cloth and deerskin; kusottaram--kusa grass; tatra--thereupon; eka-
agram--one attention; manah--mind; krtva--doing so; yata-citta--
controlling the mind; indriya--senses; kriyah--activities; upavisya--
sitting on; asane--on the seat; yunjyat--execute; yogam--yoga practice;
atma--heart; visuddhaye--for clarifying.



TRANSLATION

To practice yoga, one should go to a secluded place and should lay kusa
grass on the ground and then cover it with a deerskin and a soft cloth.
The seat should neither be too high nor too low and should be situated
in a sacred place. The yogi should then sit on it very firmly and
should practice yoga by controlling the mind and the senses, purifying
the heart and fixing the mind on one point.

PURPORT

"Sacred place" refers to places of pilgrimage. In India the yogis, the
transcendentalists or the devotees all leave home and reside in sacred
places such as Prayaga, Mathura, Vrndavana, Hrsikesa and Hardwar and in
solitude practice yoga where the sacred rivers like the Yamuna and the
Ganges flow. But often this is not possible, especially for Westerners.
The so-called yoga societies in big cities may be successful in earning
material benefit, but they are not at all suitable for the actual
practice of yoga. One who is not self-controlled and whose mind is not
undisturbed cannot practice meditation. Therefore, in the Brhan-
naradiya Purana it is said that in the Kali-yuga (the present yuga, or
age) when people in general are short-lived, slow in spiritual
realization and always disturbed by various anxieties, the best means
of spiritual realization is chanting the holy name of the Lord.

harer nama harer nama
harer namaiva kevalam
kalau nasty eva nasty eva
nasty eva gatir anyatha

"In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy the only means of deliverance is
chanting the holy name of the Lord. There is no other way. There is no
other way. There is no other way."

TEXTS 13-14

samam kaya-siro-grivam
dharayann acalam sthirah
sampreksya nasikagram svam
disas canavalokayan

prasantatma vigata-bhir
brahmacari-vrate sthitah
manah samyamya mac-citto
yukta asita mat-parah

SYNONYMS

samam--straight; kaya-sirah--body and head; grivam--neck; dharayan--
holding; acalam--unmoved; sthirah--still; sampreksya--looking; nasika--
nose; agram--tip; svam--own; disah--all sides; ca--also; anavalokayan--
not seeing; prasanta--unagitated; atma--mind; vigata-bhih--devoid of
fear; brahmacari-vrate--in the vow of celibacy; sthitah--situated;
manah--mind; samyamya--completely subduing; mat--upon Me (Krsna);
cittah--concentrated; yuktah--the actual yogi; asita--being so; mat--
unto Me; parah--the ultimate goal.

TRANSLATION



One should hold one's body, neck and head erect in a straight line and
stare steadily at the tip of the nose. Thus, with an unagitated,
subdued mind, devoid of fear, completely free from sex life, one should
meditate upon Me within the heart and make Me the ultimate goal of
life.

PURPORT

The goal of life is to know Krsna, who is situated within the heart of
every living being as Paramatma, the four-handed Visnu form. The yoga
process is practiced in order to discover and see this localized form
of Visnu, and not for any other purpose. The localized visnu-murti is
the plenary representation of Krsna dwelling within one's heart. One
who has no program to realize this visnu-murti is uselessly engaged in
mock-yoga practice and is certainly wasting his time. Krsna is the
ultimate goal of life, and the visnu-murti situated in one's heart is
the object of yoga practice. To realize this visnu-murti within the
heart, one has to observe complete abstinence from sex life; therefore
one has to leave home and live alone in a secluded place, remaining
seated as mentioned above. One cannot enjoy sex life daily at home or
elsewhere and attend a so-called yoga class and thus become a yogi. One
has to practice controlling the mind and avoiding all kinds of sense
gratification, of which sex life is the chief. In the rules of celibacy
written by the great sage Yajnavalkya it is said:

karmana manasa vaca
sarvavasthasu sarvada
sarvatra maithuna-tyago
brahmacaryam pracaksate

"The vow of brahmacarya is meant to help one completely abstain from
sex indulgence in work, words and mind--at all times, under all
circumstances, and in all places." No one can perform correct yoga
practice through sex indulgence. Brahmacarya is taught, therefore, from
childhood when one has no knowledge of sex life. Children at the age of
five are sent to the guru-kula, or the place of the spiritual master,
and the master trains the young boys in the strict discipline of
becoming brahmacaris. Without such practice, no one can make
advancement in any yoga, whether it be dhyana, jnana or bhakti. One
who, however, follows the rules and regulations of married life, having
a sexual relationship only with his wife (and that also under
regulation), is also called brahmacari. Such a restrained householder
brahmacari may be accepted in the bhakti school, but the jnana and
dhyana schools do not even admit householder brahmacaris. They require
complete abstinence without compromise. In the bhakti school, a
householder brahmacari is allowed controlled sex life because the cult
of bhakti-yoga is so powerful that one automatically loses sexual
attraction, being engaged in the superior service of the Lord. In the
Bhagavad-gita (2.59) it is said:

visaya vinivartante
niraharasya dehinah
rasa-varjam raso 'py asya
param drstva nivartate

Whereas others are forced to restrain themselves from sense
gratification, a devotee of the Lord automatically refrains because of



superior taste. Other than the devotee, no one has any information of
that superior taste.
Vigata-bhih. One cannot be fearless unless one is fully in Krsna
consciousness. A conditioned soul is fearful due to his perverted
memory, his forgetfulness of his eternal relationship with Krsna. The
Bhagavatam (11.2.37) says, bhayam dvitiyabhinivesatah syad isad
apetasya viparyayo 'smrtih. Krsna consciousness is the only basis for
fearlessness. Therefore, perfect practice is possible for a person who
is Krsna conscious. And since the ultimate goal of yoga practice is to
see the Lord within, a Krsna conscious person is already the best of
all yogis. The principles of the yoga system mentioned herein are
different from those of the popular so-called yoga societies.

TEXT 15

yunjann evam sadatmanam
yogi niyata-manasah
santim nirvana-paramam
mat-samstham adhigacchati

SYNONYMS

yunjan--practicing like this; evam--as mentioned above; sada--
constantly; atmanam--body, mind and soul; yogi--the mystic
transcendentalist; niyata-manasah--regulated mind; santim--peace;
nirvana-paramam--cessation of material existence; mat-samstham--in the
spiritual sky (the kingdom of God); adhigacchati--does attain.

TRANSLATION

Thus practicing control of the body, mind and activities, the mystic
transcendentalist attains to the kingdom of God [or the abode of Krsna]
by cessation of material existence.

PURPORT

The ultimate goal in practicing yoga is now clearly explained. Yoga
practice is not meant for attaining any kind of material facility; it
is to enable the cessation of all material existence. One who seeks an
improvement in health or aspires after material perfection is no yogi
according to Bhagavad-gita. Nor does cessation of material existence
entail one's entering into "the void," which is only a myth. There is
no void anywhere within the creation of the Lord. Rather, the cessation
of material existence enables one to enter into the spiritual sky, the
abode of the Lord. The abode of the Lord is also clearly described in
the Bhagavad-gita as that place where there is no need of sun, moon or
electricity. All the planets in the spiritual kingdom are self-
illuminated like the sun in the material sky. The kingdom of God is
everywhere, but the spiritual sky and the planets thereof are called
param dhama, or superior abodes.
A consummate yogi, who is perfect in understanding Lord Krsna, as is
clearly stated herein (mat-cittah, mat-parah, mat-sthanam) by the Lord
Himself, can attain real peace and can ultimately reach His supreme
abode, the Krsnaloka, known as Goloka Vrndavana. In the Brahma-samhita
(5.37) it is clearly stated, (goloka eva nivasaty akhilatma-bhutah)
that the Lord, although residing always in His abode called Goloka, is
the all-pervading Brahman and the localized Paramatma as well by dint
of His superior spiritual energies. No one can reach the spiritual sky



(Vaikuntha) or enter into the Lord's eternal abode (Goloka Vrndavana)
without the proper understanding of Krsna and His plenary expansion
Visnu. Therefore a person working in Krsna consciousness is the perfect
yogi, because his mind is always absorbed in Krsna's activities (sa vai
manah krsna-padaravindayoh). In the Vedas also (Svetasvatara Upanisad
3.8) we learn, tam eva viditvati mrtyum eti: "One can overcome the path
of birth and death only by understanding the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Krsna." In other words, perfection of the yoga system is the
attainment of freedom from material existence and not some magical
jugglery or gymnastic feats to befool innocent people.

TEXT 16

naty-asnatas 'tu yogo 'sti
na caikantam anasnatah
na cati-svapna-silasya
jagrato naiva carjuna

SYNONYMS

na--never; ati--too much; asnatah--of one who eats so; tu--but; yogah--
linking with the Supreme; asti--there is; na--nor; ca--also; ekantam--
very low; anasnatah--abstaining from eating; na--nor; ca--also; ati--
too much; svapna-silasya--of one who sleeps too much; jagratah--or one
who keeps night watch too much; na--not; eva--ever; ca--and; arjuna--O
Arjuna.

TRANSLATION

There is no possibility of one's becoming a yogi, O Arjuna, if one eats
too much, or eats too little, sleeps too much or does not sleep enough.

PURPORT

Regulation of diet and sleep is recommended herein for the yogis. Too
much eating means eating more than is required to keep the body and
soul together. There is no need for men to eat animals, because there
is an ample supply of grains, vegetables, fruits and milk. Such simple
foodstuff is considered to be in the mode of goodness according to the
Bhagavad-gita. Animal food is for those in the mode of ignorance.
Therefore, those who indulge in animal food, drinking, smoking and
eating food which is not first offered to Krsna will suffer sinful
reactions because of eating only polluted things. Bhunjate te tv agham
papa ye pacanty atma-karanat. Anyone who eats for sense pleasure, or
cooks for himself, not offering his food to Krsna, eats only sin. One
who eats sin and eats more than is allotted to him cannot execute
perfect yoga. It is best that one eat only the remnants of foodstuff
offered to Krsna. A person in Krsna consciousness does not eat anything
which is not first offered to Krsna. Therefore, only the Krsna
conscious person can attain perfection in yoga practice. Nor can one
who artificially abstains from eating, manufacturing his own personal
process of fasting, practice yoga. The Krsna conscious person observes
fasting as it is recommended in the scriptures. He does not fast or eat
more than is required, and he is thus competent to perform yoga
practice. One who eats more than required will dream very much while
sleeping, and he must consequently sleep more than is required. One
should not sleep more than six hours daily. One who sleeps more than
six hours out of twenty-four is certainly influenced by the mode of



ignorance. A person in the mode of ignorance is lazy and prone to sleep
a great deal. Such a person cannot perform yoga.

TEXT 17

yuktahara-viharasya
yukta-cestasya karmasu
yukta-svapnavabodhasya
yogo bhavati duhkha-ha

SYNONYMS

yukta--regulated; ahara--eating; viharasya--recreation; yukta--
regulated; cestasya--of one who works for maintenance; karmasu--in
discharging duties; yukta--regulated; svapna-avabodhasya--regulated
sleep and wakefulness; yogah--practice of yoga; bhavati--becomes;
duhkha-ha--diminishing pains.

TRANSLATION

He who is temperate in his habits of eating, sleeping, working and
recreation can mitigate all material pains by practicing the yoga
system.

PURPORT

Extravagance in the matter of eating, sleeping, defending and mating--
which are demands of the body--can block advancement in the practice of
yoga. As far as eating is concerned, it can be regulated only when one
is practiced to take and accept prasadam, sanctified food. Lord Krsna
is offered, according to the Bhagavad-gita (9.26), vegetables, flowers,
fruits, grains, milk, etc. In this way, a person in Krsna consciousness
becomes automatically trained not to accept food not meant for human
consumption, or which not in the category of goodness. As far as
sleeping is concerned, a Krsna conscious person is always alert in the
discharge of his duties in Krsna consciousness, and therefore any
unnecessary time spent sleeping is considered a great loss. Avyartha-
kalatvam: a Krsna conscious person cannot bear to pass a minute of his
life without being engaged in the service of the Lord. Therefore, his
sleeping is kept to a minimum. His ideal in this respect is Srila Rupa
Gosvami, who was always engaged in the service of Krsna and who could
not sleep more than two hours a day, and sometimes not even that.
Thakura Haridasa would not even accept prasadam nor even sleep for a
moment without finishing his daily routine of chanting with his beads
three hundred thousand names. As far as work is concerned, a Krsna
conscious person does not do anything which is not connected with
Krsna's interest, and thus his work is always regulated and is
untainted by sense gratification. Since there is no question of sense
gratification, there is no material leisure for a person in Krsna
consciousness. And because he is regulated in all his work, speech,
sleep, wakefulness and all other bodily activities, there is no
material misery for him.

TEXT 18

yada viniyatam cittam
atmany evavatisthate
nisprhah sarva-kamebhyo



yukta ity ucyate tada

SYNONYMS

yada--when; viniyatam--particularly disciplined; cittam--the mind and
its activities; atmani--in the transcendence; eva--certainly;
avatisthate--becomes situated; nisprhah--devoid of desire; sarva--all
kinds of; kamebhyah--material desires; yuktah--well situated in yoga;
iti--thus; ucyate--is said to be; tada--at that time.

TRANSLATION

When the yogi, by practice of yoga, disciplines his mental activities
and becomes situated in transcendence--devoid of all material desires--
he is said to have attained yoga.

PURPORT

The activities of the yogi are distinguished from those of an ordinary
person by his characteristic cessation from all kinds of material
desires--of which sex is the chief. A perfect yogi is so well
disciplined in the activities of the mind that he can no longer be
disturbed by any kind of material desire. This perfectional stage can
automatically be attained by persons in Krsna consciousness, as stated
in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (9.4.18-20):

sa vai manah krsna-padaravindayor
vacamsi vaikuntha-gunanuvarnane
karau harer mandira-marjanadisu
srutim cakaracyuta-sat-kathodaye

mukunda-lingalaya-darsane drsau
tad-bhrtya-gatra-sparse 'nga-sangamam
ghranam ca tat-pada-saroja-saurabhe
srimat-tulasya rasanam tad-arpite

padau hareh ksetra-padanusarpane
siro hrsikesa-padabhivandane
kamam ca dasye na tu kama-kamyaya
yathottama-sloka-janasraya ratih

"King Ambarisa first of all engaged his mind on the lotus feet of Lord
Krsna; then, one after another, he engaged his words in describing the
transcendental qualities of the Lord, his hands in mopping the temple
of the Lord, his ears in hearing of the activities of the Lord, his
eyes in seeing the transcendental forms of the Lord, his body in
touching the bodies of the devotees, his sense of smell in smelling the
scents of the lotus flower offered to the Lord, his tongue in tasting
the tulasi leaf offered at the lotus feet of the Lord, his legs in
going to places of pilgrimage and the temple of the Lord, his head in
offering obeisances unto the Lord and his desires in executing the
mission of the Lord. All these transcendental activities are quite
befitting a pure devotee."
This transcendental stage may be inexpressible subjectively by the
followers of the impersonalist path, but it becomes very easy and
practical for a person in Krsna consciousness, as is apparent in the
above description of the engagements of Maharaja Ambarisa. Unless the
mind is fixed on the lotus feet of the Lord by constant remembrance,



such transcendental engagements are not practical. In the devotional
service of the Lord, therefore, these prescribed activities are called
arcana, or engaging all the senses in the service of the Lord. The
senses and the mind require engagements. Simple abnegation is not
practical. Therefore, for people in general--especially those who are
not in the renounced order of life--transcendental engagement of the
senses and the mind as described above is the perfect process for
transcendental achievement, which is called yukta in the Bhagavad-gita.

TEXT 19

yatha dipo nivata-stho
nengate sopama smrta
yogino yata-cittasya
yunjato yogam atmanah

SYNONYMS

yatha--as; dipah--a lamp; nivata-sthah--in a place without wind; na--
does not; ingate--waver; sa upama--compared to that; smrta--likened;
yoginah--of the yogi; yata-cittasya--whose mind is controlled;
yunjatah--constantly engaged in; yogam--meditation; atmanah--on
transcendence.

TRANSLATION

As a lamp in a windless place does not waver, so the transcendentalist,
whose mind is controlled, remains always steady in his meditation on
the transcendent self.

PURPORT

A truly Krsna conscious person, always absorbed in transcendence, in
constant undisturbed meditation on his worshipable Lord, is as steady
as a lamp in a windless place.

TEXTS 20-23

yatroparamate cittam
niruddham yoga-sevaya
yatra caivatmanatmanam
pasyann atmani tusyati

sukham atyantikam yat tad
buddhi-grahyam atindriyam
vetti yatra na caivayam
sthitas calati tattvatah

yam labdhva caparam labham
manyate nadhikam tatah
yasmin sthito na duhkhena
gurunapi vicalyate

tam vidyad duhkha-samyoga-
viyogam yoga-samjnitam

SYNONYMS



yatra--in that state of affairs; uparamate--when one feels
transcendental happiness; cittam--mental activities; niruddham--
restrained from matter; yoga-sevaya--by performance of yoga; yatra--in
that; ca--also; eva--certainly; atmana--by the pure mind; atmanam--the
self; pasyan--realizing the position; atmani--in the self; tusyati--
becomes satisfied; sukham--happiness; atyantikam--supreme; yat--in
which; tat--that; buddhi--intelligence; grahyam--accessible;
atindriyam--transcendental; vetti--knows; yatra--wherein; na--never;
ca--also; eva--certainly; ayam--in this; sthitah--situated; calati--
moves; tattvatah--from the truth; yam--that which; labdhva--by
attainment; ca--also; aparam--any other; labham--gain; manyate--does
not mind; na--never; adhikam--more than that; tatah--from that; yasmin-
-in which; sthitah--being situated; na--never; duhkhena--by miseries;
guruna api--even though very difficult; vicalyate--becomes shaken; tam-
-that; vidyat--you must know; duhkha-samyoga--miseries of material
contact; viyogam--extermination; yoga-samjnitam--trance in yoga.

TRANSLATION

The stage of perfection is called trance, or samadhi, when one's mind
is completely restrained from material mental activities by practice of
yoga. This is characterized by one's ability to see the self by the
pure mind and to relish and rejoice in the self. In that joyous state,
one is situated in boundless transcendental happiness and enjoys
himself through transcendental senses. Established thus, one never
departs from the truth and upon gaining this he thinks there is no
greater gain. Being situated in such a position, one is never shaken,
even in the midst of greatest difficulty. This indeed is actual freedom
from all miseries arising from material contact.

PURPORT

By practice of yoga one becomes gradually detached from material
concepts. This is the primary characteristic of the yoga principle. And
after this, one becomes situated in trance, or samadhi, which means
that the yogi realizes the Supersoul through transcendental mind and
intelligence, without any of the misgivings of identifying the self
with the Superself. Yoga practice is more or less based on the
principles of the Patanjali system. Some unauthorized commentators try
to identify the individual soul with the Supersoul, and the monists
think this to be liberation, but they do not understand the real
purpose of the Patanjali system of yoga. There is an acceptance of
transcendental pleasure in the Patanjali system, but the monists do not
accept this transcendental pleasure, out of fear of jeopardizing the
theory of oneness. The duality of knowledge and knower is not accepted
by the nondualist, but in this verse transcendental pleasure--realized
through transcendental senses--is accepted. And this is corroborated by
Patanjali Muni, the famous exponent of the yoga system. The great sage
declares in his Yoga-sutras (3.34): purusartha-sunyanam gunanam
pratiprasavah kaivalyam svarupa-pratistha va citi-saktir iti.
This citi-sakti, or internal potency, is transcendental. Purusartha
means material religiosity, economic development, sense gratification
and, at the end, the attempt to become one with the Supreme. This
"oneness with the Supreme" is called kaivalyam by the monist. But
according to Patanjali, this kaivalyam is an internal, or
transcendental, potency by which the living entity becomes aware of his
constitutional position. In the words of Lord Caitanya, this state of
affairs is called ceto-darpana-marjanam, or clearance of the impure



mirror of the mind. This "clearance" is actually liberation, or bhava-
maha-davagni-nirvapanam. The theory of nirvana--also preliminary--
corresponds with this principle. In the Bhagavatam (2.10.6) this is
called svarupena vyavasthitih. The Bhagavad-gita also confirms this
situation in this verse.
After nirvana, or material cessation, there is the manifestation of
spiritual activities, or devotional service to the Lord, known as Krsna
consciousness. In the words of the Bhagavatam, svarupena vyavasthitih:
this is the "real life of the living entity." Maya, or illusion, is the
condition of spiritual life contaminated by material infection.
Liberation from this material infection does not mean destruction of
the original eternal position of the living entity. Patanjali also
accepts this by his words kaivalyam svarupa-pratistha va citi-saktir
iti. This citi-sakti, or transcendental pleasure, is real life. This is
confirmed in the Vedanta-sutra (1.1.12) as ananda-mayo 'bhyasat. This
natural transcendental pleasure is the ultimate goal of yoga and is
easily achieved by execution of devotional service, or bhakti-yoga.
Bhakti-yoga will be vividly described in the Seventh Chapter of
Bhagavad-gita.
In the yoga system, as described in this chapter, there are two kinds
of samadhi, called samprajnata-samadhi and asamprajnata-samadhi. When
one becomes situated in the transcendental position by various
philosophical researches, it is called samprajnata-samadhi. In the
asamprajnata-samadhi there is no longer any connection with mundane
pleasure, for one is then transcendental to all sorts of happiness
derived from the senses. When the yogi is once situated in that
transcendental position, he is never shaken from it. Unless the yogi is
able to reach this position, he is unsuccessful. Today's so-called yoga
practice, which involves various sense pleasures, is contradictory. A
yogi indulging in sex and intoxication is a mockery. Even those yogis
who are attracted by the siddhis (perfections) in the process of yoga
are not perfectly situated. If the yogis are attracted by the by-
products of yoga, then they cannot attain the stage of perfection, as
is stated in this verse. Persons, therefore, indulging in the make-show
practice of gymnastic feats or siddhis should know that the aim of yoga
is lost in that way.
The best practice of yoga in this age is Krsna consciousness, which is
not baffling. A Krsna conscious person is so happy in his occupation
that he does not aspire after any other happiness. There are many
impediments especially in this age of hypocrisy, to practicing hatha-
yoga, dhyana-yoga and jnana-yoga, but there is no such problem in
executing karma-yoga or bhakti-yoga.
As long as the material body exists, one has to meet the demands of the
body, namely eating, sleeping, defending and mating. But a person who
is in pure bhakti-yoga or in Krsna consciousness does not arouse the
senses while meeting the demands of the body. Rather, he accepts the
bare necessities of life, making the best use of a bad bargain, and
enjoys transcendental happiness in Krsna consciousness. He is callous
toward incidental occurrences--such as accidents, disease, scarcity and
even the death of a most dear relative--but he is always alert to
execute his duties in Krsna consciousness or bhakti-yoga. Accidents
never deviate him from his duty. As stated in the Bhagavad-gita (2.14),
agamapayino 'nityas tams titiksasva bharata. He endures all such
incidental occurrences because he knows that they come and go and do
not affect his duties. In this way he achieves the highest perfection
in yoga practice.

TEXT 24



sa niscayena yoktavyo
yogo 'nirvinna-cetasa
sankalpa-prabhavan kamams
tyaktva sarvan asesatah
manasaivendriya-gramam
viniyamya samantatah

SYNONYMS

sah--that yoga system; niscayena--with firm determination; yoktavyah--
must be practiced; yogah--in such practice; anirvinna-cetasa--without
deviation; sankalpa--material desires; prabhavan--born of; kaman--sense
gratification; tyaktva--giving up; sarvan--all; asesatah--completely;
manasa--by the mind; eva--certainly; indriya-gramam--the full set of
senses; viniyamya--regulating; samantatah--from all sides.

TRANSLATION

One should engage oneself in the practice of yoga with undeviating
determination and faith. One should abandon, without exception, all
material desires born of false ego and thus control all the senses on
all sides by the mind.

PURPORT

The yoga practitioner should be determined and should patiently
prosecute the practice without deviation. One should be sure of success
at the end and pursue this course with great perseverance, not becoming
discouraged if there is any delay in the attainment of success. Success
is sure for the rigid practitioner. Regarding bhakti-yoga, Rupa Gosvami
says:

utsahan niscayad dhairyat
tat-tat-karma-pravartanat
sanga-tyagat sato vrtteh
sadbhir bhaktih prasidhyati

"The process of bhakti-yoga can be executed successfully with full-
hearted enthusiasm, perseverance, and determination by following the
prescribed duties in the association of devotees and by engaging
completely in activities of goodness." (Upadesamrta 3)
As for determination, one should follow the example of the sparrow who
lost her eggs in the waves of the ocean. A sparrow laid her eggs on the
shore of the ocean, but the big ocean carried away the eggs on its
waves. The sparrow became very upset and asked the ocean to return her
eggs. The ocean did not even consider her appeal. So the sparrow
decided to dry up the ocean. She began to pick out the water in her
small beak, and everyone laughed at her for her impossible
determination. The news of her activity spread, and at last Garuda, the
gigantic bird carrier of Lord Visnu, heard it. He became compassionate
toward his small sister bird, and so he came to see the sparrow. Garuda
was very pleased by the determination of the small sparrow, and he
promised to help. Thus Garuda at once asked the ocean to return her
eggs lest he himself take up the work of the sparrow. The ocean was
frightened at this, and returned the eggs. Thus the sparrow became
happy by the grace of Garuda.



Similarly, the practice of yoga, especially bhakti-yoga in Krsna
consciousness, may appear to be a very difficult job. But if anyone
follows the principles with great determination, the Lord will surely
help, for God helps those who help themselves.

TEXT 25

sanaih sanair uparamed
buddhya dhrti-grhitaya
atma-samstham manah krtva
na kincid api cintayet

SYNONYMS

sanaih--gradually; sanaih--step by step; uparamet--hesitated; buddhya--
by intelligence; dhrti-grhitaya--carrying the conviction; atma-
samstham--placed in transcendence; manah--mind; krtva--doing so; na--
not; kincit--anything else; api--even; cintayet--be thinking of.

TRANSLATION

Gradually, step by step, with full conviction, one should become
situated in trance by means of intelligence, and thus the mind should
be fixed on the self alone and should think of nothing else.

PURPORT

By proper conviction and intelligence one should gradually cease sense
activities. This is called pratyahara. The mind, being controlled by
conviction, meditation, and cessation of the senses, should be situated
in trance, or samadhi. At that time there is no longer any danger of
becoming engaged in the material conception of life. In other words,
although one is involved with matter as long as the material body
exists, one should not think about sense gratification. One should
think of no pleasure aside from the pleasure of the Supreme Self. This
state is easily attained by directly practicing Krsna consciousness.

TEXT 26

yato yato niscalati
manas cancalam asthiram
tatas tato niyamyaitad
atmany eva vasam nayet

SYNONYMS

yatah--whatever; yatah--wherever; niscalati--verily agitated; manah--
the mind; cancalam--flickering; asthiram--unsteady; tatah--from there;
tatah--and thereafter; niyamya--regulating; etat--this; atmani--in the
self; eva--certainly; vasam--control; nayet--must bring in.

TRANSLATION

From whatever and wherever the mind wanders due to its flickering and
unsteady nature, one must certainly withdraw it and bring it back under
the control of the self.

PURPORT



The nature of the mind is flickering and unsteady. But a self-realized
yogi has to control the mind; the mind should not control him. One who
controls the mind (and therefore the senses as well) is called gosvami,
or svami, and one who is controlled by the mind is called go-dasa, or
the servant of the senses. A gosvami knows the standard of sense
happiness. In transcendental sense happiness, the senses are engaged in
the service of Hrsikesa, or the supreme owner of the senses--Krsna.
Serving Krsna with purified senses is called Krsna consciousness. That
is the way of bringing the senses under full control. What is more,
that is the highest perfection of yoga practice.

TEXT 27

prasanta-manasam hy enam
yoginam sukham uttamam
upaiti santa-rajasam
brahma-bhutam akalmasam

SYNONYMS

prasanta--mind fixed on the lotus feet of Krsna; manasam--of one whose
mind is so fixed; hi--certainly; enam--this; yoginam--the yogi; sukham-
-happiness; uttamam--the highest; upaiti--attains; santa-rajasam--
pacified passion; brahma-bhutam--liberation by identification with the
Absolute; akalmasam--freed from all past sinful reaction.

TRANSLATION

The yogi whose mind is fixed on Me verily attains the highest
happiness. By virtue of his identity with Brahman, he is liberated; his
mind is peaceful, his passions are quieted, and he is freed from sin.

PURPORT

Brahma-bhuta is the state of being free from material contamination and
situated in the transcendental service of the Lord. Mad-bhaktim labhate
param (Bg. 18.54). One cannot remain in the quality of Brahman, the
Absolute, until one's mind is fixed on the lotus feet of the Lord. Sa
vai manah krsna-padaravindayoh. To be always engaged in the
transcendental loving service of the Lord, or to remain in Krsna
consciousness, is to be factually liberated from the mode of passion
and all material contamination.

TEXT 28

yunjann evam sadatmanam
yogi vigata-kalmasah
sukhena brahma-samsparsam
atyantam sukham asnute

SYNONYMS

yunjan--thus being engaged in yoga practice; evam--thus; sada--always;
atmanam--self; yogi--one who is in touch with the Supreme Self; vigata-
-is freed from; kalmasah--all material contamination; sukhena--in
transcendental happiness; brahma-samsparsam--being in constant touch



with the Supreme; atyantam--highest; sukham--happiness; asnute--
attains.

TRANSLATION

Steady in the self, being freed from all material contamination, the
yogi achieves the highest perfetional stage of happiness in touch with
the supreme consciousness.

PURPORT

Self-realization means knowing one's constitutional position in
relationship to the Supreme. The individual soul is part and parcel of
the Supreme, and his position is to render transcendental service to
the Lord. This transcendental contact with the Supreme is called
brahma-samsparsa.

TEXT 29

sarva-bhuta-stham atmanam
sarva-bhutani catmani
iksate yoga-yuktatma
sarvatra sama-darsanah

SYNONYMS

sarva-bhuta-stham--situated in all beings; atmanam--the Supersoul;
sarva--all; bhutani--entities; ca--also; atmani--in the self; iksate--
does see; yoga-yukta-atma--one who is dovetailed in Krsna
consciousness; sarvatra--everywhere; sama-darsanah--seeing equally.

TRANSLATION

A true yogi observes Me in all beings, and also sees every being in Me.
Indeed, the self-realized man sees Me everywhere.

PURPORT

A Krsna conscious yogi is the perfect seer because he sees Krsna, the
Supreme, situated in everyone's heart as Supersoul (Paramatma). Isvarah
sarva-bhutanam hrd-dese 'rjuna tisthati. The Lord in His Paramatma
feature is situated within both the heart of the dog and that of a
brahmana. The perfect yogi knows that the Lord is eternally
transcendental and is not materially affected by His presence in either
a dog or a brahmana. That is the supreme neutrality of the Lord. The
individual soul is also situated in the individual heart, but he is not
present in all hearts. That is the distinction between the individual
soul and the Supersoul. One who is not factually in the practice of
yoga cannot see so clearly. A Krsna conscious person can see Krsna in
the heart of both the believer and the nonbeliever. In the smrti this
is confirmed as follows: atatatvac ca matrtvac ca atma hi paramo harih.
The Lord, being the source of all beings, is like the mother and the
maintainer. As the mother is neutral to all different kinds of
children, the supreme father (or mother) is also. Consequently the
Supersoul is always in every living being.
Outwardly, also, every living being is situated in the energy of the
Lord. As will be explained in the Seventh Chapter, the Lord has,
primarily, two energies--the spiritual (or superior) and the material



(or inferior). The living entity, although part of the superior energy,
is conditioned by the inferior energy; the living entity is always in
the Lord's energy. Every living entity is situated in Him in one way or
another.
The yogi sees equally because he sees that all living entities,
although in different situations according to the results of fruitive
work, in all circumstances remain the servants of God. While in the
material energy, the living entity serves the material senses; and
while in spiritual energy, he serves the Supreme Lord directly. In
either case the living entity is the servant of God. This vision of
equality is perfect in a person in Krsna consciousness.

TEXT 30

yo mam pasyati sarvatra
sarvam ca mayi pasyati
tasyaham na pranasyami
sa ca me na pranasyati

SYNONYMS

yah--whoever; mam--Me; pasyati--sees; sarvatra--everywhere; sarvam--
everything; ca--and; mayi--in Me; pasyati--he sees; tasya--his; aham--
I; na--not; pranasyami--am lost; sah--he; ca--also; me--to Me; na--nor;
pranasyati--is lost.

TRANSLATION

For one who sees Me everywhere and sees everything in Me, I am never
lost, nor is he ever lost to Me.

PURPORT

A person in Krsna consciousness certainly sees Lord Krsna everywhere,
and he sees everything in Krsna. Such a person may appear to see all
separate manifestations of the material nature, but in each and every
instance he is conscious of Krsna, knowing that everything is the
manifestation of Krsna's energy. Nothing can exist without Krsna, and
Krsna is the Lord of everything--this is the basic principle of Krsna
consciousness. Krsna consciousness is the development of love of Krsna-
-a position transcendental even to material liberation. It is the stage
beyond self-realization at which the devotee becomes one with Krsna in
the sense that Krsna becomes everything for the devotee and the devotee
becomes full in loving Krsna. An intimate relationship between the Lord
and the devotee then exists. In that stage, the living entity attains
his immortality. Nor is the Personality of Godhead ever out of the
sight of the devotee. To merge in Krsna is spiritual annihilation. A
devotee takes no such risk. It is stated in the Brahma-samhita (5.38):

premanjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
santah sadaiva hrdayesu vilokayanti
yam syamasundaram acintya-guna-svarupam
govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami

"I worship the primeval Lord, Govinda, who is always seen by the
devotee whose eyes are anointed with the pulp of love. He is seen in
His eternal form of Syamasundara situated within the heart of the
devotee."



At this stage, Lord Krsna never disappears from the sight of the
devotee, nor does the devotee ever lose sight of the Lord. In the case
of a yogi who sees the Lord as Paramatma within the heart, the same
applies. Such a yogi turns into a pure devotee and cannot bear to live
for a moment without seeing the Lord within himself.

TEXT 31

sarva-bhuta-sthitam yo mam
bhajaty ekatvam asthitah
sarvatha vartamano 'pi
sa yogi mayi vartate

SYNONYMS

sarva-bhuta-sthitam--situated in everyone's heart; yah--he who; mam--
unto Me; bhajati--serves in devotional service; ekatvam--oneness;
asthitah--thus situated; sarvatha--in all respects; varta-manah--being
situated; api--in spite of; sah--he; yogi--transcendentalist; mayi--
unto Me; vartate--remains.

TRANSLATION

The yogi who knows that I and the Supersoul within all creatures are
one worships Me and remains always in Me in all circumstances.

PURPORT

A yogi who is practicing meditation on the Supersoul sees within
himself the plenary portion of Krsna as Visnu--with four hands, holding
conchshell, wheel, club and lotus flower. The yogi should know that
Visnu is not different from Krsna. Krsna in this form of Supersoul is
situated in everyone's heart. Furthermore, there is no difference
between the innumerable Supersouls present in the innumerable hearts of
living entities. Nor is there a difference between a Krsna conscious
person always engaged in the transcendental loving service of Krsna and
a perfect yogi engaged in meditation on the Supersoul. The yogi in
Krsna consciousness--even though he may be engaged in various
activities while in material existence--remains always situated in
Krsna. This is confirmed in the Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.2.187) of
Srila Rupa Gosvami: nikhilasv apy avasthasu jivan-muktah sa ucyate. A
devotee of the Lord, always acting in Krsna consciousness, is
automatically liberated. In the Narada-pancaratra this is confirmed in
this way:

dik-kalady-anavacchinne
krsne ceto vidhaya ca
tan-mayo bhavati ksipram
jivo brahmani yojayet

"By concentrating one's attention on the transcendental form of Krsna,
who is all-pervading and beyond time and space, one becomes absorbed in
thinking of Krsna and then attains the happy state of transcendental
association with Him."
Krsna consciousness is the highest stage of trance in yoga practice.
This very understanding that Krsna is present as Paramatma in
everyone's heart makes the yogi faultless. The Vedas (Gopala-tapani
Upanisad 1.21) confirm this inconceivable potency of the Lord as



follows: eko 'pi san bahudha yo 'vabhati. "Although the Lord is one, He
is present in innumerable hearts as many." Similarly, in the smrti-
sastra it is said:

eka eva paro visnuh
sarva-vyapi na samsayah
aisvaryad rupam ekam ca
surya-vat bahudheyate

"Visnu is one, and yet He is certainly all-pervading. By His
inconceivable potency, in spite of His one form, He is present
everywhere, as the sun appears in many places at once."

TEXT 32

atmaupamyena sarvatra
samam pasyati yo 'rjuna
sukham va yadi va duhkham
sa yogi paramo matah

SYNONYMS

atma--self; aupamyena--by comparison; sarvatra--everywhere; samam--
equally; pasyati--sees; yah--he who; arjuna--O Arjuna; sukham--
happiness; va--or; yadi--if; va--or; duhkham--distress; sah--such;
yogi--transcendentalist; paramah--perfect; matah--considered.

TRANSLATION

He is a perfect yogi who, by comparison to his own self, sees the true
equality of all beings, both in their happiness and distress, O Arjuna!

PURPORT

One who is Krsna conscious is a perfect yogi; he is aware of everyone's
happiness and distress by dint of his own personal experience. The
cause of the distress of a living entity is forgetfulness of his
relationship with God. And the cause of happiness is knowing Krsna to
be the supreme enjoyer of all the activities of the human being. Krsna
is the proprietor of all lands and planets, and the sincerest friend of
all living entities. The perfect yogi knows that the living being who
is conditioned by the modes of material nature is subjected to the
threefold material miseries due to forgetfulness of his relationship
with Krsna. Because one in Krsna consciousness is happy, he tries to
distribute the knowledge of Krsna everywhere. Since the perfect yogi
tries to broadcast the importance of becoming Krsna conscious, he is
the best philanthropist in the world, and he is the dearest servitor of
the Lord. Na ca tasman manusyesu kascin me priya-krttamah (Bg. 18.69).
In other words, a devotee of the Lord always looks to the welfare of
all living entities, and in this way he is factually the friend of
everyone. He is the best yogi because he does not desire perfection in
yoga for his personal benefit, but tries for others also. He does not
envy his fellow living entities. Here is a contrast between a pure
devotee of the Lord and a yogi interested only in his personal
elevation. The yogi who has withdrawn to a secluded place in order to
meditate perfectly may not be as perfect as a devotee who is trying his
best to turn every man toward Krsna consciousness.



TEXT 33

arjuna uvaca
yo 'yam yogas tvaya proktah
samyena madhusudana
etasyaham na pasyami
cancalatvat sthitim sthiram

SYNONYMS

arjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; yah--the system; ayam--this; yogah--
mysticism; tvaya--by You; proktah--described; samyena--generally;
madhu-sudana--O killer of the demon Madhu; etasya--of this; aham--I;
na--do not; pasyami--see; cancalatvat--due to being restless; sthitim--
situation; sthiram--stable.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: O Madhusudana, the system of yoga which You have
summarized appears impractical and unendurable to me, for the mind is
restless and unsteady.

PURPORT

The system of mysticism described by Lord Krsna to Arjuna beginning
with the words sucau dese and ending with yogi paramah is here being
rejected by Arjuna out of a feeling of inability. It is not possible
for an ordinary man to leave home and go to a secluded place in the
mountains or jungles to practice yoga in this Age of Kali. The present
age is characterized by a bitter struggle for a life of short duration.
People are not serious about self-realization even by simple, practical
means, and what to speak of this difficult yoga system, which regulates
the mode of living, the manner of sitting, selection of place, and
detachment of the mind from material engagements. As a practical man,
Arjuna thought it was impossible to follow this system of yoga, even
though he was favorably endowed in many ways. He belonged to the royal
family and was highly elevated in terms of numerous qualities; he was a
great warrior, he had great longevity, and, above all, he was the most
intimate friend of Lord Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Five
thousand years ago, Arjuna had much better facilities than we do now,
yet he refused to accept this system of yoga. In fact, we do not find
any record in history of his practicing it at any time. Therefore this
system must be considered generally impossible in this Age of Kali. Of
course it may be possible for some very few, rare men, but for the
people in general it is an impossible proposal. If this were so five
thousand years ago, then what of the present day? Those who are
imitating this yoga system in different so-called schools and
societies, although complacent, are certainly wasting their time. They
are completely in ignorance of the desired goal.

TEXT 34

cancalam hi manah krsna
pramathi balavad drdham
tasyaham nigraham manye
vayor iva su-duskaram

SYNONYMS



cancalam--flickering; hi--certainly; manah--mind; krsna--O Krsna;
pramathi--agitating; bala-vat--strong; drdham--obstinate; tasya--its;
aham--I; nigraham--subduing; manye--think; vayoh--of the wind; iva--
like; su-duskaram--difficult.

TRANSLATION

For the mind is restless, turbulent, obstinate and very strong, O Krsna
and to subdue it, I think, is more difficult than controlling the wind.

PURPORT

The mind is so strong and obstinate that it sometimes overcomes the
intelligence, although mind is supposed to be subservient to the
intelligence. For a man in the practical world who has to fight so many
opposing elements, it is certainly very difficult to control the mind.
Artificially, one may establish a mental equilibrium toward both friend
and enemy, but ultimately no worldly man can do so, for this is more
difficult than controlling the raging wind. In the Vedic literature
(Katha Upanisad 1.3.3-4) it is said:

atmanam rathinam viddhi
sariram ratham eva ca
buddhim tu sarathim viddhi
manah pragraham eva ca

indriyani hayan ahur
visayams tesu gocaran
atmendriya-mano-yuktam
bhoktety ahur manisinah

"The individual is the passenger in the car of the material body, and
intelligence is the driver. Mind is the driving instrument, and the
senses are the horses. The self is thus the enjoyer or sufferer in the
association of the mind and senses. So it is understood by great
thinkers." Intelligence is supposed to direct the mind, but the mind is
so strong and obstinate that it often overcomes even one's own
intelligence. Such a strong mind is supposed to be controlled by the
practice of yoga, but such practice is never practical for a worldly
person like Arjuna. And what can we say of modern man? The simile used
here is appropriate: one cannot capture the blowing wind. And it is
even more difficult to capture the turbulent mind. The easiest way to
control the mind, as suggested by Lord Caitanya, is chanting "Hare
Krsna," the great mantra for deliverance, in all humility. The method
prescribed is sa vai manah krsna-padaravindayoh: one must engage one's
mind fully in Krsna. Only then will there remain no other engagements
to agitate the mind.

TEXT 35

sri-bhagavan uvaca
asamsayam maha-baho
mano durnigraham calam
abhyasena tu kaunteya
vairagyena ca grhyate

SYNONYMS



sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Personality of Godhead said; asamsayam--
undoubtedly; maha-baho--O mighty-armed one; manah--mind; durnigraham--
difficult to curb; calam--flickering; abhyasena--by practice; tu--but;
kaunteya--O son of Kunti; vairagyena--by detachment; ca--also; grhyate-
-can be so controlled.

TRANSLATION

The Blessed Lord said: O mighty-armed son of Kunti, it is undoubtedly
very difficult to curb the restless mind, but it is possible by
constant practice and by detachment.

PURPORT

The difficulty of controlling the obstinate mind, as expressed by
Arjuna, is accepted by the Personality of Godhead. But at the same time
He suggests that by practice and detachment it is possible. What is
that practice? In the present age no one can observe the strict rules
and regulations of placing oneself in a sacred place, focusing the mind
on the Supersoul, restraining the senses and mind, observing celibacy,
remaining alone, etc. By the practice of Krsna consciousness, however,
one engages in nine types of devotional service to the Lord. The first
and foremost of such devotional engagements is hearing about Krsna.
This is a very powerful transcendental method for purging the mind of
all misgivings. The more one hears about Krsna, the more one becomes
enlightened and detached from everything that draws the mind away from
Krsna. By detaching the mind from activities not devoted to the Lord,
one can very easily learn vairagya. Vairagya means detachment from
matter and engagement of the mind in spirit. Impersonal spiritual
detachment is more difficult than attaching the mind to the activities
of Krsna. This is practical because by hearing about Krsna one becomes
automatically attached to the Supreme Spirit. This attachment is called
paresanubhava, spiritual satisfaction. It is just like the feeling of
satisfaction a hungry man has for every morsel of food he eats.
Similarly, by discharge of devotional service one feels transcendental
satisfaction as the mind becomes detached from material objectives. It
is something like curing a disease by expert treatment and appropriate
diet. Hearing of the transcendental activities of Lord Krsna is
therefore expert treatment for the mad mind, and eating the foodstuff
offered to Krsna is the appropriate diet for the suffering patient.
This treatment is the process of Krsna consciousness.

TEXT 36

asamyatatmana yogo
dusprapa iti me matih
vasyatmana tu yatata
sakyo 'vaptum upayatah

SYNONYMS

asamyata--unbridled; atmana--by the mind; yogah--self-realization;
dusprapah--difficult to obtain; iti--thus; me--My; matih--opinion;
vasya--controlled; atmana--by the mind; tu--but; yatata--while
endeavoring; sakyah--practical; avaptum--to achieve; upayatah--
appropriate means.



TRANSLATION

For one whose mind is unbridled, self-realization is difficult work.
But he whose mind is controlled and who strives by right means is
assured of success. That is My opinion.

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead declares that one who does not
accept the proper treatment to detach the mind from material engagement
can hardly achieve success in self-realization. Trying to practice yoga
while engaging the mind in material enjoyment is like trying to ignite
a fire while pouring water on it. Similarly, yoga practice without
mental control is a waste of time. Such a show of yoga practice may be
materially lucrative, but it is useless as far as spiritual realization
is concerned. Therefore, the mind must be controlled by engaging it
constantly in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. Unless one
is engaged in Krsna consciousness, he cannot steadily control the mind.
A Krsna conscious person easily achieves the result of yoga practice
without separate endeavor, but a yoga practitioner cannot achieve
success without becoming Krsna conscious.

TEXT 37

arjuna uvaca
ayatih sraddhayopeto
yogac calita-manasah
aprapya yoga-samsiddhim
kam gatim krsna gacchati

SYNONYMS

arjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; ayatih--unsuccessful transcendentalist;
sraddhaya--with faith; upetah--engaged; yogat--from the mystic link;
calita--deviated; manasah--of one who has such a mind; aprapya--
failing; yoga-samsiddhim--highest perfection in mysticism; kam--which;
gatim--destination; krsna--O Krsna; gacchati--achieves.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: What is the destination of the man of faith who does not
persevere, who in the beginning takes to the process of self-
realization but who later desists due to worldly-mindedness and thus
does not attain perfection in mysticism?

PURPORT

The path of self-realization or mysticism is described in the Bhagavad-
gita. The basic principle of self-realization is knowledge that the
living entity is not this material body but that he is different from
it and that his happiness is in eternal life, bliss and knowledge.
These are transcendental, beyond both body and mind. Self-realization
is sought by the path of knowledge, the practice of the eightfold
system or by bhakti-yoga. In each of these processes one has to realize
the constitutional position of the living entity, his relationship with
God, and the activities whereby he can reestablish the lost link and
achieve the highest perfectional stage of Krsna consciousness.
Following any of the above-mentioned three methods, one is sure to



reach the supreme goal sooner or later. This was asserted by the Lord
in the Second Chapter: even a little endeavor on the transcendental
path offers a great hope for deliverance. Out of these three methods,
the path of bhakti-yoga is especially suitable for this age because it
is the most direct method of God realization. To be doubly assured,
Arjuna is asking Lord Krsna to confirm His former statement. One may
sincerely accept the path of self-realization, but the process of
cultivation of knowledge and the practice of the eightfold yoga system
are generally very difficult for this age. Therefore, despite constant
endeavor one may fail for many reasons. First of all, one may not be
following the process. To pursue the transcendental path is more or
less to declare war on the illusory energy. Consequently, whenever a
person tries to escape the clutches of the illusory energy, she tries
to defeat the practitioner by various allurements. A conditioned soul
is already allured by the modes of material energy, and there is every
chance of being allured again, even while performing transcendental
disciplines. This is called yogac calita-manasah: deviation from the
transcendental path. Arjuna is inquisitive to know the results of
deviation from the path of self-realization.

TEXT 38

kaccin nobhaya-vibhrastas
chinnabhram iva nasyati
apratistho maha-baho
vimudho brahmanah pathi

SYNONYMS

kaccit--whether; na--not; ubhaya--both; vibhrastah--deviated from;
chinna--fallen; abhram--cloud; iva--like; nasyati--perishes;
apratisthah--without any position; maha-baho--O mighty-armed Krsna;
vimudhah--bewildered; brahmanah--of transcendence; pathi--on the path.

TRANSLATION

O mighty-armed Krsna, does not such a man, being deviated from the path
of transcendence, perish like a riven cloud, with no position in any
sphere?

PURPORT

There are two ways to progress. Those who are materialists have no
interest in transcendence; therefore they are more interested in
material advancement by economic development, or in promotion to the
higher planets by appropriate work. When one takes to the path of
transcendence, one has to cease all material activities and sacrifice
all forms of so-called material happiness. If the aspiring
transcendentalist fails, then he apparently loses both ways; in other
words, he can enjoy neither material happiness nor spiritual success.
He has no position; he is like a riven cloud. A cloud in the sky
sometimes deviates from a small cloud and joins a big one. But if it
cannot join a big one, then it is blown away by the wind and becomes a
nonentity in the vast sky. The brahmanah pathi is the path of
transcendental realization through knowing oneself to be spiritual in
essence, part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, who is manifested as
Brahman, Paramatma and Bhagavan. Lord Sri Krsna is the fullest
manifestation of the Supreme Absolute Truth, and therefore one who is



surrendered to the Supreme Person is a successful transcendentalist. To
reach this goal of life through Brahman and Paramatma realization takes
many, many births (bahunam janmanam ante). Therefore the supermost path
of transcendental realization is bhakti-yoga, or Krsna consciousness,
the direct method.

TEXT 39

etan me samsayam krsna
chettum arhasy asesatah
tvad-anyah samsayasyasya
chetta na hy upapadyate

SYNONYMS

etat--this is; me--my; samsayam--doubt; krsna--O Krsna; chettum--to
dispel; arhasi--requested to do; asesatah--completely; tvat--than You;
anyah--without; samsayasya--of the doubt; asya--of this; chetta--
remover; na--never; hi--certainly; upapadyate--to be found.

TRANSLATION

This is my doubt, O Krsna, and I ask You to dispel it completely. But
for Yourself, no one is to be found who can destroy this doubt.

PURPORT

Krsna is the perfect knower of past, present and future. In the
beginning of the Bhagavad-gita, the Lord said that all living entities
existed individually in the past, they exist now in the present, and
they continue to retain individual identity in the future, even after
liberation from the material entanglement. So He has already cleared up
the question of the future of the individual living entity. Now, Arjuna
wants to know of the future of the unsuccessful transcendentalist. No
one is equal to or above Krsna, and certainly the so-called great sages
and philosophers who are at the mercy of material nature cannot equal
Him. Therefore the verdict of Krsna is the final and complete answer to
all doubts, because He knows past, present and future perfectly--but no
one knows Him. Krsna and Krsna conscious devotees alone can know what
is what.

TEXT 40

sri-bhagavan uvaca
partha naiveha namutra
vinasas tasya vidyate
na hi kalyana-krt kascid
durgatim tata gacchati

SYNONYMS

sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; partha--O
son of Prtha; na eva--never is it so; iha--in this material world; na--
never; amutra--in the next life; vinasah--destruction; tasya--his;
vidyate--exists; na--never; hi--certainly; kalyana-krt--one who is
engaged in auspicious activities; kascit--anyone; durgatim--
degradation; tata--thereafter; gacchati--goes.



TRANSLATION

The Blessed Lord said: Son of Prtha, a transcendentalist engaged in
auspicious activities does not meet with destruction either in this
world or in the spiritual world; one who does good, My friend, is never
overcome by evil.

PURPORT

In the Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.5.17) Sri Narada Muni instructs Vyasadeva
as follows:

tyaktva sva-dharmam caranambujam harer
bhajann apakvo 'tha patet tato yadi
yatra kva vabhadram abhud amusya kim
ko vartha apto 'bhajatam sva-dharmatah

"If someone gives up all material prospects and takes complete shelter
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, there is no loss or degradation
in any way. On the other hand a nondevotee may fully engage in his
occupational duties and yet not gain anything." For material prospects,
there are many activities both scriptural and customary. A
transcendentalist is supposed to give up all material activities for
the sake of spiritual advancement in life, Krsna consciousness. One may
argue that by Krsna consciousness one may attain the highest perfection
if it is completed, but if one does not attain such a perfectional
stage, then he loses both materially and spiritually. It is enjoined in
the scriptures that one has to suffer the reaction of not executing
prescribed duties; therefore one who fails to discharge transcendental
activities properly becomes subjected to these reactions. The
Bhagavatam assures the unsuccessful transcendentalist that there need
be no worries. Even though he may be subjected to the reaction of not
perfectly executing prescribed duties, he is still not a loser, because
auspicious Krsna consciousness is never forgotten, and one so engaged
will continue to be so even if he is lowborn in the next life. On the
other hand, one who simply follows strictly the prescribed duties need
not necessarily attain auspicious results if he is lacking in Krsna
consciousness.
The purport may be understood as follows: humanity may be divided into
two sections, namely, the regulated and the nonregulated. Those who are
engaged simply in bestial sense gratifications without knowledge of
their next life or spiritual salvation belong to the nonregulated
section. And those who follow the principles of prescribed duties in
the scriptures are classified amongst the regulated section. The
nonregulated section, both civilized and noncivilized, educated and
noneducated, strong and weak, are full of animal propensities. Their
activities are never auspicious, because while enjoying the animal
propensities of eating, sleeping, defending and mating, they
perpetually remain in material existence, which is always miserable. On
the other hand, those who are regulated by scriptural injunctions and
thus gradually rise to Krsna consciousness certainly progress in life.
Those who are then following the path of auspiciousness can be divided
into three sections, namely 1) the followers of scriptural rules and
regulations who are enjoying material prosperity, 2) those who are
trying to find out ultimate liberation from material existence, and 3)
those who are devotees in Krsna consciousness. Those who are following
the rules and regulations of the scriptures for material happiness may
be further divided into two classes: those who are fruitive workers and



those who desire no fruit for sense gratification. Those who are after
fruitive results for sense gratification may be elevated to a higher
standard of life--even to the higher planets; but still, because they
are not free from material existence, they are not following the truly
auspicious path. The only auspicious activities are those which lead
one to liberation. Any activity which is not aimed at ultimate self-
realization or liberation from the material bodily concept of life is
not at all auspicious. Activity in Krsna consciousness is the only
auspicious activity, and anyone who voluntarily accepts all bodily
discomforts for the sake of making progress on the path of Krsna
consciousness can be called a perfect transcendentalist under severe
austerity. And because the eightfold yoga system is directed toward the
ultimate realization of Krsna consciousness, such practice is also
auspicious, and no one who is trying his best in this matter need fear
degradation.

TEXT 41

prapya punya-krtam lokan
usitva sasvatih samah
sucinam srimatam gehe
yoga-bhrasto 'bhijayate

SYNONYMS

prapya--after achieving; punya-krtam--of those who performed pious
activities; lokan--planets; usitva--after dwelling; sasvatih--many;
samah--years; sucinam--of the pious; sri-matam--of the prosperous;
gehe--in the house of; yoga-bhrastah--one who is fallen from the path
of self-realization; abhijayate--takes his birth.

TRANSLATION

The unsuccessful yogi, after many, many years of enjoyment on the
planets of the pious living entities, is born into a family of
righteous people, or into a family of rich aristocracy.

PURPORT

The unsuccessful yogis are divided into two classes: one is fallen
after very little progress, and one is fallen after long practice of
yoga. The yogi who falls after a short period of practice goes to the
higher planets where pious living entities are allowed to enter. After
prolonged life there, he is sent back again to this planet, to take
birth in the family of a righteous brahmana vaisnava or of aristocratic
merchants.
The real purpose of yoga practice is to achieve the highest perfection
of Krsna consciousness. But those who do not persevere to such an
extent and fail due to material allurements are allowed, by the grace
of the Lord, to make full utilization of their material propensities.
And after that, they are given opportunities to live prosperous lives
in righteous or aristocratic families. Those who are born in such
families may take advantage of the facilities and try to elevate
themselves to full Krsna consciousness.

TEXT 42

atha va yoginam eva



kule bhavati dhimatam
etad dhi durlabhataram
loke janma yad idrsam

SYNONYMS

atha va--or; yoginam--of learned transcendentalists; eva--certainly;
kule--in the family of; bhavati--takes birth; dhi-matam--of those who
are endowed with great wisdom; etat--this; hi--certainly; durlabha-
taram--very rare; loke--in this world; janma--birth; yat--that which;
idrsam--like this.

TRANSLATION

Or he takes his birth in a family of transcendentalists who are surely
great in wisdom. Verily, such a birth is rare in this world.

PURPORT

Birth in a family of yogis or transcendentalists--those with great
wisdom--is praised herein because the child born in such a family
receives a spiritual impetus from the very beginning of his life. It is
especially the case in the acarya or gosvami families. Such families
are very learned and devoted by tradition and training, and thus they
become spiritual masters. In India there are many such acarya families,
but they have now degenerated due to insufficient education and
training. By the grace of the Lord, there are still families that
foster transcendentalists generation after generation. It is certainly
very fortunate to take birth in such families. Fortunately, both our
spiritual master, Om Visnupada Sri Srimad Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati
Gosvami Maharaja, and our humble self, had the opportunity to take
birth in such families, by the grace of the Lord, and both of us were
trained in the devotional service of the Lord from the very beginning
of our lives. Later on we met by the order of the transcendental
system.

TEXT 43

tatra tam buddhi-samyogam
labhate paurva-dehikam
yatate ca tato bhuyah
samsiddhau kuru-nandana

SYNONYMS

tatra--thereupon; tam--that; buddhi-samyogam--revival of such
consciousness; labhate--regains; paurva--previous; dehikam--bodily
consciousness; yatate--he endeavors; ca--also; tatah--thereafter;
bhuyah--again; samsiddhau--for perfection; kuru-nandana--O son of Kuru.

TRANSLATION

On taking such a birth, he again revives the divine consciousness of
his previous life, and he tries to make further progress in order to
achieve complete success, O son of Kuru.

PURPORT



King Bharata, who took his third birth in the family of a good
brahmana, is an example of good birth for the revival of previous
transcendental consciousness. King Bharata was the emperor of the
world, and since his time this planet is known among the demigods as
Bharata-varsa. Formerly it was known as Ilavrta-varsa. The emperor, at
an early age, retired for spiritual perfection but failed to achieve
success. In his next life he took birth in the family of a good
brahmana and was known as Jada Bharata because he always remained
secluded and did not talk to anyone. And later on, he was discovered as
the greatest transcendentalist by King Rahugana. From his life it is
understood that transcendental endeavors, or the practice of yoga,
never go in vain. By the grace of the Lord the transcendentalist gets
repeated opportunities for complete perfection in Krsna consciousness.

TEXT 44

purvabhyasena tenaiva
hriyate hy avaso 'pi sah
jijnasur api yogasya
sabda-brahmativartate

SYNONYMS

purva--previous; abhyasena--practice; tena--by the influence of that;
eva--certainly; hriyate--is attracted; hi--surely; avasah--helpless;
api--also; sah--he; jijnasuh--willing to know; api--so; yogasya--of
yoga; sabda-brahma--ritualistic principles of scripture; ativartate--
transcends.

TRANSLATION

By virtue of the divine consciousness of his previous life, he
automatically becomes attracted to the yogic principles--even without
seeking them. Such an inquisitive transcendentalist, striving for yoga,
stands always above the ritualistic principles of the scriptures.

PURPORT

Advanced yogis are not very much attracted to the rituals of the
scriptures, but they automatically become attracted to the yoga
principles, which can elevate them to complete Krsna consciousness, the
highest yoga perfection. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam (3.33.7), such
disregard of Vedic rituals by the advanced transcendentalists is
explained as follows:

aho bata sva-paco 'to gariyan
yaj-jihvagre vartate nama tubhyam
tepus tapas te juhuvuh sasnur arya
brahmanucur nama grnanti ye te

"O my Lord! Persons who chant the holy names of Your Lordship are far,
far advanced in spiritual life, even if born in families of dog-eaters.
Such chanters have undoubtedly performed all kinds of austerities and
sacrifices, bathed in all sacred places, and finished all scriptural
studies."
The famous example of this was presented by Lord Caitanya, who accepted
Thakura Haridasa as one of His most important disciples. Although
Thakura Haridasa happened to take his birth in a Muslim family, he was



elevated to the post of namacarya by Lord Caitanya due to his rigidly
attended principle of chanting three hundred thousand holy names of the
Lord daily: Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama,
Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. And because he chanted the holy name
of the Lord constantly, it is understood that in his previous life he
must have passed through all the ritualistic methods of the Vedas,
known as sabda-brahma. Unless, therefore, one is purified, one cannot
take to the principle of Krsna consciousness or become engaged in
chanting the holy name of the Lord, Hare Krsna.

TEXT 45

prayatnad yatamanas tu
yogi samsuddha-kilbisah
aneka-janma-samsiddhas
tato yati param gatim

SYNONYMS

prayatnat--by rigid practice; yatamanah--one who endeavors; tu--but;
yogi--such a transcendentalist; samsuddha--washed off; kilbisah--all
kinds of sins; aneka--many, many; janma--births; samsiddhah--so
achieved perfection; tatah--thereafter; yati--attains; param--highest;
gatim--destination.

TRANSLATION

But when the yogi engages himself with sincere endeavor in making
further progress, being washed of all contaminations, then ultimately,
after many, many births of practice, he attains the supreme goal.

PURPORT

A person born in a particularly righteous, aristocratic or sacred
family becomes conscious of his favorable condition for executing yoga
practice. With determination, therefore, he begins the unfinished task,
and thus he completely cleanses himself of all material contaminations.
When he is finally free from all contaminations, he attains the supreme
perfection--Krsna consciousness. Krsna consciousness is the perfect
stage of being freed of all contaminations. This is confirmed in the
Bhagavad-gita (7.28):

yesam tv anta-gatam papam
jananam punya-karmanam
te dvandva-moha-nirmukta
bhajante mam drdha-vratah

"After many, many births of executing pious activities, when one is
completely freed from all contaminations, and from all illusory
dualities, one then becomes engaged in the transcendental loving
service of the Lord."

TEXT 46

tapasvibhyo 'dhiko yogi
jnanibhyo 'pi mato 'dhikah
karmibhyas cadhiko yogi
tasmad yogi bhavarjuna



SYNONYMS

tapasvibhyah--than the ascetic; adhikah--greater; yogi--the yogi;
jnanibhyah--than the wise; api--also; matah--considered; adhikah--
greater than; karmibhyah--than the fruitive worker; ca--also; adhikah--
greater than; yogi--the yogi; tasmat--therefore; yogi--a
transcendentalist; bhava--just become; arjuna--O Arjuna.

TRANSLATION

A yogi is greater than the ascetic, greater than the empiricist and
greater than the fruitive worker. Therefore, O Arjuna, in all
circumstances, be a yogi.

PURPORT

When we speak of yoga we refer to linking up our consciousness with the
Supreme Absolute Truth. Such a process is named differently by various
practitioners in terms of the particular method adopted. When the
linking up process is predominantly in fruitive activities it is called
karma-yoga, when it is predominantly empirical it is called jnana-yoga,
and when it is predominantly in a devotional relationship with the
Supreme Lord it is called bhakti-yoga. Bhakti-yoga or Krsna
consciousness is the ultimate perfection of all yogas, as will be
explained in the next verse. The Lord has confirmed herein the
superiority of yoga, but He has not mentioned that it is better than
bhakti-yoga. Bhakti-yoga is full spiritual knowledge, and as such
nothing can excel it. Asceticism without self-knowledge is imperfect.
Empiric knowledge without surrender to the Supreme Lord is also
imperfect. And fruitive work without Krsna consciousness is a waste of
time. Therefore, the most highly praised form of yoga performance
mentioned here is bhakti-yoga, and this is still more clearly explained
in the next verse.

TEXT 47

yoginam api sarvesam
mad-gatenantar-atmana
sraddhavan bhajate yo mam
sa me yuktatamo matah

SYNONYMS

yoginam--of all yogis; api--also; sarvesam--all types of; mat-gatena--
abiding in Me; antah-atmana--always thinking of Me within; sraddha-van-
-in full faith; bhajate--renders transcendental loving service; yah--
one who; mam--Me (the Supreme Lord); sah--he; me--Mine; yukta-tamah--
the greatest yogi; matah--is considered.

TRANSLATION

And of all yogis, he who always abides in Me with great faith,
worshiping Me in transcendental loving service, is most intimately
united with Me in yoga and is the highest of all.

PURPORT



The word bhajate is significant here. Bhajate has its root in the verb
bhaj, which is used when there is need of service. The English word
"worship" cannot be used in the same sense as bhaj. Worship means to
adore, or to show respect and honor to the worthy one. But service with
love and faith is especially meant for the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. One can avoid worshiping a respectable man or a demigod and
may be called discourteous, but one cannot avoid serving the Supreme
Lord without being thoroughly condemned. Every living entity is part
and parcel of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and thus every living
entity is intended to serve the Supreme Lord by his own constitution.
Failing to do this, he falls down. The Bhagavatam (11.5.3) confirms
this as follows:

ya esam purusam saksad
atma-prabhavam isvaram
na bhajanty avajananti
sthanad bhrastah patanty adhah

"Anyone who does not render service and neglects his duty unto the
primeval Lord, who is the source of all living entities, will certainly
fall down from his constitutional position."
In this verse also the word bhajanti is used. Therefore, bhajanti is
applicable to the Supreme Lord only, whereas the word "worship" can be
applied to demigods or to any other common living entity. The word
avajananti, used in this verse of Srimad-Bhagavatam, is also found in
the Bhagavad-gita. Avajananti mam mudhah: "Only the fools and rascals
deride the Supreme Personality of Godhead Lord Krsna." Such fools take
it upon themselves to write commentaries on the Bhagavad-gita without
an attitude of service to the Lord. Consequently they cannot properly
distinguish between the word bhajanti and the word "worship."
The culmination of all kinds of yoga practices lies in bhakti yoga. All
other yogas are but means to come to the point of bhakti in bhakti-
yoga. Yoga actually means bhakti-yoga; all other yogas are progressions
toward the destination of bhakti-yoga. From the beginning of karma-yoga
to the end of bhakti-yoga is a long way to self-realization. Karma-
yoga, without fruitive results, is the beginning of this path. When
karma-yoga increases in knowledge and renunciation, the stage is called
jnana-yoga. When jnana-yoga increases in meditation on the Supersoul by
different physical processes, and the mind is on Him, it is called
astanga-yoga. And, when one surpasses the astanga-yoga he comes to the
point of the Supreme Personality of Godhead Krsna, it is called bhakti
yoga, the culmination. Factually, bhakti-yoga is the ultimate goal, but
to analyze bhakti-yoga minutely one has to understand these other
yogas. The yogi who is progressive is therefore on the true path of
eternal good fortune. One who sticks to a particular point and does not
make further progress is called by that particular name: karma-yogi,
jnana-yogi or dhyana-yogi, raja-yogi, hatha-yogi, etc. If one is
fortunate enough to come to the point of bhakti-yoga, it is to be
understood that he has surpassed all other yogas. Therefore, to become
Krsna conscious is the highest stage of yoga, just as, when we speak of
Himalayan, we refer to the world's highest mountains, of which the
highest peak, Mount Everest, is considered to be the culmination.
It is by great fortune that one comes to Krsna consciousness on the
path of bhakti-yoga to become well situated according to the Vedic
direction. The ideal yogi concentrates his attention on Krsna, who is
called Syamasundara, who is as beautifully colored as a cloud, whose
lotus-like face is as effulgent as the sun, whose dress is brilliant
with jewels and whose body is flower-garlanded. Illuminating all sides



is His gorgeous luster, which is called the brahmajyoti. He incarnates
in different forms such as Rama, Nrsimha, Varaha and Krsna, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and He descends like a human being, as the son
of mother Yasoda, and He is known as Krsna, Govinda and Vasudeva. He is
the perfect child, husband, friend and master, and He is full with all
opulences and transcendental qualities. If one remains fully conscious
of these features of the Lord, he is called the highest yogi.
This stage of highest perfection in yoga can be attained only by
bhakti-yoga, as is confirmed in all Vedic literature:

yasya deve para bhaktir
yatha deve tatha gurau
tasyaite kathita hy arthah
prakasante mahatmanah

"Only unto those great souls who have implicit faith in both the Lord
and the spiritual master are all the imports of Vedic knowledge
automatically revealed." (Svetasvatara Upanisad 6.23)
Bhaktir asya bhajanam tad ihamutropadhi-nairasyenamusmin manah-
kalpanam, etad eva naiskarmyam. "Bhakti means devotional service to the
Lord which is free from desire for material profit, either in this life
or in the next. Devoid of such inclinations, one should fully absorb
the mind in the Supreme. That is the purpose of naiskarmya." (Gopala-
tapani Upanisad 1.15)
These are some of the means for performance of bhakti, or Krsna
consciousness, the highest perfectional stage of the yoga system.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Sixth Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of  Sankhya-yoga Brahma-vidya.

Chapter 7
Knowledge of the Absolute

TEXT 1

sri-bhagavan uvaca
mayy asakta-manah partha
yogam yunjan mad-asrayah
asamsayam samagram mam
yatha jnasyasi tac chrnu

SYNONYMS

sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Lord said; mayi--unto Me; asakta-manah-
-mind attached; partha--O son of Prtha; yogam--self-realization;
yunjan--so practicing; mat-asrayah--in consciousness of Me (Krsna
consciousness); asamsayam--without doubt; samagram--completely; mam--
unto Me; yatha--as much as; jnasyasi--you can know; tat--that; srnu--
try to hear.

TRANSLATION

Now hear, O son of Prtha [Arjuna], how by practicing yoga in full
consciousness of Me, with mind attached to Me, you can know Me in full,
free from doubt.

PURPORT



In this Seventh Chapter of Bhagavad-gita, the nature of Krsna
consciousness is fully described. Krsna is full in all opulences, and
how He manifests such opulences is described herein. Also, four kinds
of fortunate people who become attached to Krsna and four kinds of
unfortunate people who never take to Krsna are described in this
chapter.
In the first six chapters of Bhagavad-gita, the living entity has been
described as nonmaterial spirit soul which is capable of elevating
himself to self-realization by different types of yogas. At the end of
the Sixth Chapter, it has been clearly stated that the steady
concentration of the mind upon Krsna, or in other words Krsna
consciousness, is the highest form of all yoga. By concentrating one's
mind upon Krsna, one is able to know the Absolute Truth completely, but
not otherwise. Impersonal brahmajyoti or localized Paramatma
realization is not perfect knowledge of the Absolute Truth because it
is partial. Full and scientific knowledge is Krsna, and everything is
revealed to the person in Krsna consciousness. In complete Krsna
consciousness one knows that Krsna is ultimate knowledge beyond any
doubts. Different types of yoga are only steppingstones on the path of
Krsna consciousness. One who takes directly to Krsna consciousness
automatically knows about brahmajyoti and Paramatma in full. By
practice of Krsna consciousness yoga, one can know everything in full--
namely the Absolute Truth, the living entities, the material nature,
and their manifestations with paraphernalia.
One should therefore begin yoga practice as directed in the last verse
of the Sixth Chapter. Concentration of the mind upon Krsna the Supreme
is made possible by prescribed devotional service in nine different
forms, of which sravanam is the first and most important. The Lord
therefore says to Arjuna, tac chrnu, or "Hear from Me." No one can be a
greater authority than Krsna, and therefore by hearing from Him one
receives the greatest opportunity for progress in Krsna consciousness.
One has therefore to learn from Krsna directly or from a pure devotee
of Krsna--and not from a nondevotee upstart, puffed up with academic
education.
In the Srimad-Bhagavatam this process of understanding Krsna, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Absolute Truth, is described in the
Second Chapter of the First Canto as follows:

srnvatam sva-kathah krsnah
punya-sravana-kirtanah
hrdy antah-stho hy abhadrani
vidhunoti suhrt satam

nasta-prayesv abhadresu
nityam bhagavata-sevaya
bhagavaty uttama-sloke
bhaktir bhavati naisthiki

tada rajas-tamo-bhavah
kama-lobhadayas ca ye
ceta etair anaviddham
sthitam sattve prasidati

evam prasanna-manaso
bhagavad-bhakti-yogatah
bhagavat-tattva-vijnanam
mukta-sangasya jayate



bhidyate hrdaya-granthis
chidyante sarva-samsayah
ksiyante casya karmani
drsta evatmanisvare

"To hear about Krsna from Vedic literatures, or to hear from Him
directly through the Bhagavad-gita, is itself righteous activity. And
for one who hears about Krsna, Lord Krsna who is dwelling in everyone's
heart, acts as a best-wishing friend and purifies the devotee who
constantly engages in hearing of Him. In this way, a devotee naturally
develops his dormant transcendental knowledge. As he hears more about
Krsna from the Bhagavatam and from the devotees, he becomes fixed in
the devotional service of the Lord. By development of devotional
service one becomes freed from the modes of passion and ignorance, and
thus material lusts and avarice are diminished. When these impurities
are wiped away, the candidate remains steady in his position of pure
goodness, becomes enlivened by devotional service and understands the
science of God perfectly. Thus bhakti-yoga severs the hard knot of
material affection and enables one to come at once to the stage of
asamsayam-samagram, understanding of the Supreme Absolute Truth
Personality of Godhead." (Bhag. 1.2.17-21)
Therefore only by hearing from Krsna or from His devotee in Krsna
consciousness can one understand the science of Krsna.

TEXT 2

jnanam te 'ham sa-vijnanam
idam vaksyamy asesatah
yaj jnatva neha bhuyo 'nyaj
jnatavyam avasisyate

SYNONYMS

jnanam--phenomenal knowledge; te--unto you; aham--I; sa--with;
vijnanam--noumenal knowledge; idam--this; vaksyami--shall explain;
asesatah--in full; yat--which; jnatva--knowing; na--not; iha--in this
world; bhuyah--further; anyat--anything more; jnatavyam--knowable;
avasisyate--remains to be known.

TRANSLATION

I shall now declare unto you in full this knowledge both phenomenal and
noumenal, by knowing which there shall remain nothing further to be
known.

PURPORT

Complete knowledge includes knowledge of the phenomenal world and the
spirit behind it. The source of both of them is transcendental
knowledge. The Lord wants to explain the above-mentioned system of
knowledge because Arjuna is Krsna's confidential devotee and friend. In
the beginning of the Fourth Chapter this explanation was given by the
Lord, and it is again confirmed here: complete knowledge can be
achieved only by the devotee of the Lord directly from the Lord in
disciplic succession. Therefore one should be intelligent enough to
know the source of all knowledge, who is the cause of all causes and
the only object for meditation in all types of yoga practice. When the
cause of all causes becomes known, then everything knowable becomes



known, and nothing remains unknown. The Vedas (Mundaka Upanisad 1.3)
say, kasmin bhagavo vijnate sarvam idam vijnatam bhavati.

TEXT 3

manusyanam sahasresu
kascid yatati siddhaye
yatatam api siddhanam
kascin mam vetti tattvatah

SYNONYMS

manusyanam--of men; sahasresu--out of many thousands; kascit--someone;
yatati--endeavors; siddhaye--for perfection; yatatam--of those so
endeavoring; api--indeed; siddhanam--of those who have achieved
perfection; kascit--someone; mam--Me; vetti--does know; tattvatah--in
fact.

TRANSLATION

Out of many thousands among men, one may endeavor for perfection, and
of those who have achieved perfection, hardly one knows Me in truth.

PURPORT

There are various grades of men, and out of many thousands one may be
sufficiently interested in transcendental realization to try to know
what is the self, what is the body, and what is the Absolute Truth.
Generally mankind is simply engaged in the animal propensities, namely
eating, sleeping, defending and mating, and hardly anyone is interested
in transcendental knowledge. The first six chapters of the Gita are
meant for those who are interested in transcendental knowledge, in
understanding the self, the Superself and the process of realization by
jnana-yoga, dhyana-yoga and discrimination of the self from matter.
However, Krsna can only be known by persons who are in Krsna
consciousness. Other transcendentalists may achieve impersonal Brahman
realization, for this is easier than understanding Krsna. Krsna is the
Supreme Person, but at the same time He is beyond the knowledge of
Brahman and Paramatma. The yogis and jnanis are confused in their
attempts to understand Krsna, although the greatest of the
impersonalists, Sripada Sankaracarya, has admitted in his Gita
commentary that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. But his
followers do not accept Krsna as such, for it is very difficult to know
Krsna, even though one has transcendental realization of impersonal
Brahman.
Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the cause of all causes,
the primeval Lord Govinda. Isvarah paramah krsnah sac-cid-ananda-
vigrahah. anadir adir govindah sarva-karana-karanam. It is very
difficult for the nondevotees to know Him. Although nondevotees declare
that the path of bhakti or devotional service is very easy, they cannot
practice it. If the path of bhakti is so easy, as the nondevotee class
of men proclaim, then why do they take up the difficult path? Actually
the path of bhakti is not easy. The so-called path of bhakti practiced
by unauthorized persons without knowledge of bhakti may be easy, but
when it is practiced factually according to the rules and regulations,
the speculative scholars and philosophers fall away from the path.
Srila Rupa Gosvami writes in his Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.2.101):



sruti-smrti-puranadi-
pancaratra-vidhim vina
aikantiki harer bhaktir
utpatayaiva kalpate

"Devotional service of the Lord that ignores the authorized Vedic
literatures like the Upanisads, Puranas, Narada-pancaratra, etc., is
simply an unnecessary disturbance in society."
It is not possible for the Brahman-realized impersonalist or the
Paramatma-realized yogi to understand Krsna the Supreme Personality of
Godhead as the son of mother Yasoda or the charioteer of Arjuna. Even
the great demigods are sometimes confused about Krsna (muhyanti yat
surayah). Mam tu veda na kascana: "No one knows Me as I am," the Lord
says. And if one does know Him, then sa mahatma su-durlabhah. "Such a
great soul is very rare." Therefore unless one practices devotional
service to the Lord, he cannot know Krsna as He is (tattvatah), even
though one is a great scholar or philosopher. Only the pure devotees
can know something of the inconceivable transcendental qualities in
Krsna, in the cause of all causes, in His omnipotence and opulence, and
in His wealth, fame, strength, beauty, knowledge and renunciation,
because Krsna is benevolently inclined to His devotees. He is the last
word in Brahman realization, and the devotees alone can realize Him as
He is. Therefore it is said:

atah sri-krsna-namadi
na bhaved grahyam indriyaih
sevonmukhe hi jihvadau
svayam eva sphuraty adah

"No one can understand Krsna as He is by the blunt material senses. But
He reveals Himself to the devotees, being pleased with them for their
transcendental loving service unto Him." (Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu
1.2.234)

TEXT 4

bhumir apo 'nalo vayuh
kham mano buddhir eva ca
ahankara itiyam me
bhinna prakrtir astadha

SYNONYMS

bhumih--earth; apah--water; analah--fire; vayuh--air; kham--ether;
manah--mind; buddhih--intelligence; eva--certainly; ca--and; ahankarah-
-false ego; iti--thus; iyam--all these; me--My; bhinna--separated;
prakrtih--energies; astadha--total eight
.

TRANSLATION

Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego--all
together these eight constitute My separated material energies.

PURPORT

The science of God analyzes the constitutional position of God and His
diverse energies. Material nature is called prakrti, or the energy of



the Lord in His different purusa incarnations (expansions) as described
in the Satvata-tantra:

visnos tu trini rupani
purusakhyany atho viduh
ekam tu mahatah srastr
dvitiyam tv anda-samsthitam
trtiyam sarva-bhuta-stham
tani jnatva vimucyate

"For material creation, Lord Krsna's plenary expansion assumes three
Visnus. The first one, Maha-Visnu, creates the total material energy,
known as mahat-tattva. The second, Garbhodakasayi Visnu, enters into
all the universes to create diversities in each of them. The third,
Ksirodakasayi Visnu, is diffused as the all-pervading Supersoul in all
the universes and is known as Paramatma, who is present even within the
atoms. Anyone who knows these three Visnus can be liberated from
material entanglement."
This material world is a temporary manifestation of one of the energies
of the Lord. All the activities of the material world are directed by
these three Visnu expansions of Lord Krsna. These purusas are called
incarnations. Generally one who does not know the science of God
(Krsna) assumes that this material world is for the enjoyment of the
living entities and that the living entities are the causes (purusas),
controllers and enjoyers of the material energy. According to Bhagavad-
gita this atheistic conclusion is false. In the verse under discussion
it is stated that Krsna is the original cause of the material
manifestation. Srimad-Bhagavatam also confirms this. The ingredients of
the material manifestation are separated energies of the Lord. Even the
brahmajyoti, which is the ultimate goal of the impersonalists, is a
spiritual energy manifested in the spiritual sky. There are no
spiritual diversities in the brahmajyoti as there are in the
Vaikunthalokas, and the impersonalist accepts this brahmajyoti as the
ultimate eternal goal. The Paramatma manifestation is also a temporary
all-pervasive aspect of the Ksirodakasayi Visnu. The Paramatma
manifestation is not eternal in the spiritual world. Therefore the
factual Absolute Truth is the Supreme Personality of Godhead Krsna. He
is the complete energetic person, and He possesses different separated
and internal energies.
In the material energy, the principal manifestations are eight, as
above mentioned. Out of these, the first five manifestations, namely
earth, water, fire, air and sky, are called the five gigantic creations
or the gross creations, within which the five sense objects are
included. They are the manifestations of physical sound, touch, form,
taste and smell. Material science comprises these ten items and nothing
more. But the other three items, namely mind, intelligence and false
ego, are neglected by the materialists. Philosophers who deal with
mental activities are also not perfect in knowledge because they do not
know the ultimate source, Krsna. The false ego--"I am," and "It is
mine," which constitute the basic principle of material existence--
includes ten sense organs for material activities. Intelligence refers
to the total material creation, called the mahat-tattva. Therefore from
the eight separated energies of the Lord are manifest the twenty-four
elements of the material world, which are the subject matter of Sankhya
atheistic philosophy; they are originally offshoots from Krsna's
energies and are separated from Him, but atheistic Sankhya philosophers
with a poor fund of knowledge do not know Krsna as the cause of all
causes. The subject matter for discussion in the Sankhya philosophy is



only the manifestation of the external energy of Krsna, as it is
described in the Bhagavad-gita.

TEXT 5

apareyam itas tv anyam
prakrtim viddhi me param
jiva-bhutam maha-baho
yayedam dharyate jagat

SYNONYMS

apara--inferior; iyam--this; itah--besides this; tu--but; anyam--
another; prakrtim--energy; viddhi--just try to understand; me--My;
param--superior; jiva-bhutam--the living entities; maha-baho--O mighty-
armed one; yaya--by whom; idam--this; dharyate--being utilized or
exploited; jagat--the material world.

TRANSLATION

Besides this inferior nature, O mighty-armed Arjuna, there is a
superior energy of Mine, which comprises all the living entities who
are struggling with material nature and are sustaining the universe.

PURPORT

Here it is clearly mentioned that living entities belong to the
superior nature (or energy) of the Supreme Lord. The inferior energy is
matter manifested in different elements, namely earth, water, fire,
air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego. Both forms of material
nature, namely gross (earth, etc.) and subtle (mind, etc.), are
products of the inferior energy. The living entities, who are
exploiting these inferior energies for different purposes, are the
superior energy of the Supreme Lord, and it is due to this energy that
the entire material world functions. The cosmic manifestation has no
power to act unless it is moved by the superior energy, the living
entity. Energies are always controlled by the energetic, and therefore
living entities are always controlled by the Lord--they have no
independent existence. They are never equally powerful, as
unintelligent men think. The distinction between the living entities
and the Lord is described in Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.87.30) as follows:

aparimita dhruvas tanu-bhrto yadi sarva-gatas
tarhi na sasyateti niyamo dhruva netaratha
ajani ca yan-mayam tad avimucya niyantr bhavet
samam anujanatam yad amatam mata-dustataya

"O Supreme Eternal! If the embodied living entities were eternal and
all-pervading like You, then they would not be under Your control. But
if the living entities are accepted as minute energies of Your
Lordship, then they are at once subject to Your supreme control.
Therefore real liberation entails surrender by the living entities to
Your control, and that surrender will make them happy. In that
constitutional position only can they be controllers. Therefore, men
with limited knowledge who advocate the monistic theory that God and
the living entities are equal in all respects are actually misleading
themselves and others."



The Supreme Lord Krsna is the only controller, and all living entities
are controlled by Him. These living entities are His superior energy
because the quality of their existence is one and the same with the
Supreme, but they are never equal to the Lord in quantity of power.
While exploiting the gross and subtle inferior energy (matter), the
superior energy (the living entity) forgets his real spiritual mind and
intelligence. This forgetfulness is due to the influence of matter upon
the living entity. But when the living entity becomes free from the
influence of the illusory material energy, he attains the stage called
mukti, or liberation. The false ego, under the influence of material
illusion, thinks, "I am matter, and material acquisitions are mine."
His actual position is realized when he is liberated from all material
ideas, including the conception of his becoming one in all respects
with God. Therefore one may conclude that the Gita confirms the living
entity to be only one of the multi-energies of Krsna; and when this
energy is freed from material contamination, it becomes fully Krsna
conscious, or liberated.

TEXT 6

etad-yonini bhutani
sarvanity upadharaya
aham krtsnasya jagatah
prabhavah pralayas tatha

SYNONYMS

etat--these two natures; yonini--source of birth; bhutani--everything
created; sarvani--all; iti--thus; upadharaya--know; aham--I; krtsnasya-
-all-inclusive; jagatah--of the world; prabhavah--source of
manifestation; pralayah--annihilation; tatha--as well as.

TRANSLATION

Of all that is material and all that is spiritual in this world, know
for certain that I am both its origin and dissolution.

PURPORT

Everything that exists is a product of matter and spirit. Spirit is the
basic field of creation, and matter is created by spirit. Spirit is not
created at a certain stage of material development. Rather, this
material world is manifested only on the basis of spiritual energy.
This material body is developed because spirit is present within
matter; a child grows gradually to boyhood and then to manhood because
of that superior energy, spirit soul, being present. Similarly, the
entire cosmic manifestation of the gigantic universe is developed
because of the presence of the Supersoul, Visnu. Therefore spirit and
matter, which combine together to manifest this gigantic universal
form, are originally two energies of the Lord, and consequently the
Lord is the original cause of everything. A fragmental part and parcel
of the Lord, namely, the living entity, may by manipulation of material
energy construct a skyscraper, a factory, or city, but he cannot create
matter out of nothing, and he certainly cannot construct a planet or a
universe. The cause of the universe is the Supersoul, Krsna, the
Supreme creator of all individual souls and the original cause of all
causes, as the Katha Upanisad (2.2.13) confirms. (Nityo nityanam
cetanas cetananam.)



TEXT 7

mattah parataram nanyat
kincid asti dhananjaya
mayi sarvam idam protam
sutre mani-gana iva

SYNONYMS

mattah--beyond Myself; para-taram--superior; na--not; anyat kincit--
anything else; asti--there is; dhananjaya--O conqueror of wealth; mayi-
-in Me; sarvam--all that be; idam--which we see; protam--strung; sutre-
-on a thread; mani-ganah--pearls; iva--likened.

TRANSLATION

O conqueror of wealth [Arjuna], there is no truth superior to Me.
Everything rests upon Me, as pearls are strung on a thread.

PURPORT

There is a common controversy over whether the Supreme Absolute Truth
is personal or impersonal. As far as Bhagavad-gita is concerned, the
Absolute Truth is the Personality of Godhead Sri Krsna, and this is
confirmed in every step. In this verse, in particular, it is stressed
that the Absolute Truth is a person. That the Personality of Godhead is
the Supreme Absolute Truth is also the affirmation of the Brahma-
samhita: isvarah paramah krsnah sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah; that is, the
Supreme Absolute Truth Personality of Godhead is Lord Krsna, who is the
primeval Lord, the reservoir of all pleasure, Govinda, and the eternal
form of complete bliss and knowledge. These authorities leave no doubt
that the Absolute Truth is the Supreme Person, the cause of all causes.
The impersonalist, however, argues on the strength of the Vedic version
given in the Svetasvatara Upanisad (3.10): tato yad uttarataram tad
arupam anamayam. ya etad vidur amrtas te bhavanti athetare duhkham
evapiyanti. "In the material world Brahma, the primeval living entity
within the universe, is understood to be the supreme amongst the
demigods, human beings and lower animals. But beyond Brahma there is
the Transcendence who has no material form and is free from all
material contaminations. Anyone who can know Him also becomes
transcendental, but those who do not know Him suffer the miseries of
the material world."
The impersonalist puts more stress on the word arupam. But this arupam
is not impersonal. It indicates the transcendental form of eternity,
bliss and knowledge as described in the Brahma-samhita quoted above.
Other verses in the Svetasvatara Upanisad (3.8-9) substantiate this as
follows:

vedaham etam purusam mahantam
aditya-varnam tamasah parastat
tam eva viditvati mrtyum eti
nanyah pantha vidyate 'yanaya

yasmat param naparam asti kincid
yasman naniyo no jyayo 'sti kincit
vrksa iva stabdho divi tisthaty ekas
tenedam purnam purusena sarvam



"I know that Supreme Personality of Godhead who is transcendental to
all material conceptions of darkness. Only he who knows Him can
transcend the bonds of birth and death. There is no way for liberation
other than this knowledge of that Supreme Person.
"There is no truth superior to that Supreme Person because He is the
supermost. He is smaller than the smallest, and He is greater than the
greatest. He is situated as a silent tree, and He illumines the
transcendental sky, and as a tree spreads its roots, He spreads His
extensive energies."
From these verses one concludes that the Supreme Absolute Truth is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead who is all-pervading by His multi-
energies, both material and spiritual.

TEXT 8

raso 'ham apsu kaunteya
prabhasmi sasi-suryayoh
pranavah sarva-vedesu
sabdah khe paurusam nrsu

SYNONYMS

rasah--taste; aham--I; apsu--in water; kaunteya--O son of Kunti; prabha
asmi--I am the light; sasi-suryayoh--in the sun and the moon; pranavah-
-the letters a-u-m; sarva--in all; vedesu--in the Vedas; sabdah--sound
vibration; khe--in the ether; paurusam--ability; nrsu--in man.

TRANSLATION

O son of Kunti [Arjuna], I am the taste of water, the light of the sun
and the moon, the syllable om in the Vedic mantras; I am the sound in
ether and ability in man.

PURPORT

This verse explains how the Lord is all-pervasive by His diverse
material and spiritual energies. The Supreme Lord can be preliminarily
perceived by His different energies, and in this way He is realized
impersonally. As the demigod in the sun is a person and is perceived by
his all-pervading energy, the sunshine, similarly the Lord, although in
His eternal abode, is perceived by His all-pervading, diffusive
energies. The taste of water is the active principle of water. No one
likes to drink sea water because the pure taste of water is mixed with
salt. Attraction for water depends on the purity of the taste, and this
pure taste is one of the energies of the Lord. The impersonalist
perceives the presence of the Lord in water by its taste, and the
personalist also glorifies the Lord for His kindly supplying water to
quench man's thirst. That is the way of perceiving the Supreme.
Practically speaking, there is no conflict between personalism and
impersonalism. One who knows God knows that the impersonal conception
and personal conception are simultaneously present in everything and
that there is no contradiction. Therefore Lord Caitanya established His
sublime doctrine: acintya bheda-and-abheda-tattva--simultaneously one
and different.
The light of the sun and the moon is also originally emanating from the
brahmajyoti, which is the impersonal effulgence of the Lord. Similarly
pranava or the omkara transcendental sound in the beginning of every



Vedic hymn to address the Supreme Lord also emanates from Him. Because
the impersonalists are very much afraid of addressing the Supreme Lord
Krsna by His innumerable names, they prefer to vibrate the
transcendental sound omkara. But they do not realize that omkara is the
sound representation of Krsna. The jurisdiction of Krsna consciousness
extends everywhere, and one who knows Krsna consciousness is blessed.
Those who do not know Krsna are in illusion, and so knowledge of Krsna
is liberation, and ignorance of Him is bondage.

TEXT 9

punyo gandhah prthivyam ca
tejas casmi vibhavasau
jivanam sarva-bhutesu
tapas casmi tapasvisu

SYNONYMS

punyah--original; gandhah--fragrance; prthivyam--in the earth; ca--
also; tejah--temperature; ca--also; asmi--I am; vibhavasau--in the
fire; jivanam--life; sarva--all; bhutesu--living entities; tapah--
penance; ca--also; asmi--I am; tapasvisu--in those who practice
penance.

TRANSLATION

I am the original fragrance of the earth, and I am the heat in fire. I
am the life of all that lives, and I am the penances of all ascetics.

PURPORT

Punya means that which is not decomposed; punya is original. Everything
in the material world has a certain flavor or fragrance, as the flavor
and fragrance in a flower, or in the earth, in water, in fire, in air,
etc. The uncontaminated flavor, the original flavor, which permeates
everything, is Krsna. Similarly, everything has a particular original
taste, and this taste can be changed by the mixture of chemicals. So
everything original has some smell, some fragrance, and some taste.
Vibhava means fire. Without fire we cannot run factories, we cannot
cook, etc., and that fire is Krsna. The heat in the fire is Krsna.
According to Vedic medicine, indigestion is due to a low temperature in
the belly. So even for digestion fire is needed. In Krsna consciousness
we become aware that earth, water, fire, air and every active
principle, all chemicals and all material elements are due to Krsna.
The duration of man's life is also due to Krsna. Therefore by the grace
of Krsna, man can prolong his life or diminish it. So Krsna
consciousness is active in every sphere.

TEXT 10

bijam mam sarva-bhutanam
viddhi partha sanatanam
buddhir buddhimatam asmi
tejas tejasvinam aham

SYNONYMS



bijam--the seed; mam--unto Me; sarva-bhutanam--of all living entities;
viddhi--try to understand; partha--O son of Prtha; sanatanam--original,
eternal; buddhih--intelligence; buddhi-matam--of the intelligent; asmi-
-I am; tejah--prowess; tejasvinam--of the powerful; aham--I am.

TRANSLATION

O son of Prtha, know that I am the original seed of all existences, the
intelligence of the intelligent, and the prowess of all powerful men.

PURPORT

Bijam means seed; Krsna is the seed of everything. In contact with
material nature, the seed fructifies into various living entities,
movable and inert. Birds, beasts, men and many other living creatures
are moving living entities; trees and plants, however, are inert--they
cannot move, but only stand. Every entity is contained within the scope
of 8,400,000 species of life; some of them are moving and some of them
are inert. In all cases, however, the seed of their life is Krsna. As
stated in Vedic literature, Brahman, or the Supreme Absolute Truth, is
that from which everything is emanating. Krsna is Parabrahman, the
Supreme Spirit. Brahman is impersonal and Parabrahman is personal.
Impersonal Brahman is situated in the personal aspect--that is stated
in Bhagavad-gita. Therefore, originally, Krsna is the source of
everything. He is the root. As the root of a tree maintains the whole
tree, Krsna, being the original root of all things, maintains
everything in this material manifestation. This is also confirmed in
the Vedic literature. Yato va imani bhutani jayante. "The Supreme
Absolute Truth is that from which everything is born." He is the prime
eternal among all eternals. He is the supreme living entity of all
living entities, and He alone is maintaining all life. Krsna also says
that He is the root of all intelligence. Unless a person is intelligent
he cannot understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna.

TEXT 11

balam balavatam caham
kama-raga-vivarjitam
dharmaviruddho bhutesu
kamo 'smi bharatarsabha

SYNONYMS

balam--strength; bala-vatam--of the strong; ca--and; aham--I am; kama--
passion; raga--attachment; vivarjitam--devoid of; dharma-aviruddhah--
not against the religious principles; bhutesu--in all beings; kamah--
sex life; asmi--I am; bharata-rsabha--O lord of the Bharatas.

TRANSLATION

I am the strength of the strong, devoid of passion and desire. I am sex
life which is not contrary to religious principles, O lord of the
Bharatas [Arjuna].

PURPORT

The strong man's strength should be applied to protect the weak, not
for personal aggression. Similarly, sex life, according to religious



principles (dharma), should be for the propagation of children, not
otherwise. The responsibility of parents is then to make their
offspring Krsna conscious.

TEXT 12

ye caiva sattvika bhava
rajasas tamasas ca ye
matta eveti tan viddhi
na tv aham tesu te mayi

SYNONYMS

ye--all those; ca--and; eva--certainly; sattvikah--in goodness; bhavah-
-states of being; rajasah--mode of passion; tamasah--mode of ignorance;
ca--also; ye--although; mattah--from Me; eva--certainly; iti--thus;
tan--those; viddhi--try to know; na--not; tu--but; aham--I; tesu--in
those; te--they; mayi--unto Me.

TRANSLATION

All states of being--be they of goodness, passion or ignorance--are
manifested by My energy. I am, in one sense, everything--but I am
independent. I am not under the modes of this material nature.

PURPORT

All material activities in the world are being conducted under the
three modes of material nature. Although these material modes of nature
are emanations from the Supreme Lord, Krsna, He is not subject to them.
For instance, under the state laws one may be punished, but the king,
the lawmaker, is not subject to that law. Similarly, all the modes of
material nature--goodness, passion and ignorance--are emanations from
the Supreme Lord Krsna, but Krsna is not subject to material nature.
Therefore He is nirguna, which means that these gunas, or modes,
although issuing from Him, do not affect Him. That is one of the
special characteristics of Bhagavan, or the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.

TEXT 13

tribhir guna-mayair bhavair
ebhih sarvam idam jagat
mohitam nabhijanati
mam ebhyah param avyayam

SYNONYMS

tribhih--three; guna-mayaih--by the three gunas; bhavaih--state of
being; ebhih--all these; sarvam--the whole world; idam--in this world;
jagat--universe; mohitam--deluded; na abhijanati--do not know; mam--Me;
ebhyah--above these; param--the Supreme; avyayam--inexhaustible.

TRANSLATION

Deluded by the three modes [goodness, passion and ignorance], the whole
world does not know Me, who am above the modes and inexhaustible.



PURPORT

The whole world is enchanted by three modes of material nature. Those
who are bewildered by these three modes cannot understand that
transcendental to this material nature is the Supreme Lord, Krsna. In
this material world everyone is under the influence of these three
gunas and is thus bewildered.
By nature living entities have particular types of body and particular
types of psychic and biological activities accordingly. There are four
classes of men functioning in the three modes of nature. Those who are
purely in the mode of goodness are called brahmanas. Those who are
purely in the mode of passion are called ksatriyas. Those who are in
the modes of both passion and ignorance are called vaisyas. Those who
are completely in ignorance are called sudras. And those who are less
than that are animals or animal life. However, these designations are
not permanent. I may either be a brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya or
whatever--in any case, this life is temporary. But although life is
temporary and we do not know what we are going to be in the next life,
still, by the spell of this illusory energy, we consider ourselves in
the light of this bodily conception of life, and we thus think that we
are American, Indian, Russian or brahmana, Hindu, Muslim, etc. And if
we become entangled with the modes of material nature, then we forget
the Supreme Personality of Godhead who is behind all these modes. So
Lord Krsna says that men, deluded by these three modes of nature, do
not understand that behind the background is the Supreme Godhead.
There are many different kinds of living entities--human beings,
demigods, animals, etc.--and each and every one of them is under the
influence of material nature, and all of them have forgotten the
transcendent Personality of Godhead. Those who are in the modes of
passion and ignorance, and even those who are in the mode of goodness,
cannot go beyond the impersonal Brahman conception of the Absolute
Truth. They are bewildered before the Supreme Lord in His personal
feature, which possesses all beauty, opulence, knowledge, strength,
fame and renunciation. When even those who are in goodness cannot
understand, what hope is there for those in passion and ignorance?
Krsna consciousness is transcendental to all these three modes of
material nature, and those who are truly established in Krsna
consciousness are actually liberated.

TEXT 14

daivi hy esa guna-mayi
mama maya duratyaya
mam eva ye prapadyante
mayam etam taranti te

SYNONYMS

daivi--transcendental; hi--certainly; esa--this; guna-mayi--consisting
of the three modes of material nature; mama--My; maya--energy;
duratyaya--very difficult to overcome; mam--unto Me; eva--certainly;
ye--those; prapadyante--surrender; mayam etam--this illusory energy;
taranti--overcome; te--they.

TRANSLATION



This divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three modes of material
nature, is difficult to overcome. But those who have surrendered unto
Me can easily cross beyond it.

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead has innumerable energies, and all
these energies are divine. Although the living entities are part of His
energies and are therefore divine, due to contact with material energy,
their original superior power is covered. Being thus covered by
material energy, one cannot possibly overcome its influence. As
previously stated, both the material and spiritual natures, being
emanations from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, are eternal. The
living entities belong to the eternal superior nature of the Lord, but
due to contamination by the inferior nature, matter, their illusion is
also eternal. The conditioned soul is therefore called nitya-baddha, or
eternally conditioned. No one can trace out the history of his becoming
conditioned at a certain date in material history. Consequently, his
release from the clutches of material nature is very difficult, even
though that material nature is an inferior energy, because material
energy is ultimately conducted by the supreme will, which the living
entity cannot overcome. Inferior material nature is defined herein as
divine nature due to its divine connection and movement by the divine
will. Being conducted by divine will, material nature, although
inferior, acts so wonderfully in the construction and destruction of
the cosmic manifestation. The Vedas confirm this as follows: mayam tu
prakrtim vidyan mayinam tu mahesvaram. "Although maya [illusion] is
false or temporary, the background of maya is the supreme magician, the
Personality of Godhead, who is Mahesvara, the supreme controller."
(Svetasvatara Upanisad 4.10)
Another meaning of guna is rope; it is to be understood that the
conditioned soul is tightly tied by the ropes of illusion. A man bound
by the hands and feet cannot free himself--he must be helped by a
person who is unbound. Because the bound cannot help the bound, the
rescuer must be liberated. Therefore, only Lord Krsna, or His bona fide
representative the spiritual master, can release the conditioned soul.
Without such superior help, one cannot be freed from the bondage of
material nature. Devotional service, or Krsna consciousness, can help
one gain such release. Krsna, being the Lord of illusory energy, can
order this insurmountable energy to release the conditioned soul. He
orders this release out of His causeless mercy on the surrendered soul
and out of His paternal affection for the living entity, who is
originally a beloved son of the Lord. Therefore surrender unto the
lotus feet of the Lord is the only means to get free from the clutches
of the stringent material nature.
The words mam eva are also significant. Mam means unto Krsna (Visnu)
only, and not Brahma or Siva. Although Brahma and Siva are greatly
elevated and are almost on the level of Visnu, it is not possible for
such incarnations of rajo-guna (passion) and tamo-guna (ignorance) to
release the conditioned soul from the clutches of maya. In other words,
both Brahma and Siva are also under the influence of maya. Only Visnu
is the master of maya; therefore He alone can give release to the
conditioned soul. The Vedas (Svetasvatara Upanisad 3.8) confirm this in
the phrase tam eva viditva. or "Freedom is possible only by
understanding Krsna." Even Lord Siva affirms that liberation can be
achieved only by the mercy of Visnu. Lord Siva says, mukti-pradata
sarvesam visnur eva na samsayah: "There is no doubt that Visnu is the
deliverer of liberation for everyone."



TEXT 15

na mam duskrtino mudhah
prapadyante naradhamah
mayayapahrta-jnana
asuram bhavam asritah

SYNONYMS

na--not; mam--unto Me; duskrtinah--miscreants; mudhah--foolish;
prapadyante--surrender; nara-adhamah--lowest among mankind; mayaya--by
the illusory energy; apahrta--stolen by illusion; jnanah--knowledge;
asuram--demonic; bhavam--nature; asritah--accepting.

TRANSLATION

Those miscreants who are grossly foolish, lowest among mankind, whose
knowledge is stolen by illusion, and who partake of the atheistic
nature of demons, do not surrender unto Me.

PURPORT

It is said in Bhagavad-gita that simply by surrendering oneself unto
the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality Krsna, one can surmount the
stringent laws of material nature. At this point a question arises: How
is it that educated philosophers, scientists, businessmen,
administrators and all the leaders of ordinary men do not surrender to
the lotus feet of Sri Krsna, the all-powerful Personality of Godhead?
Mukti, or liberation from the laws of material nature, is sought by the
leaders of mankind in different ways and with great plans and
perseverance for a great many years and births. But if that liberation
is possible by simply surrendering unto the lotus feet of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, then why don't these intelligent and hard-
working leaders adopt this simple method?
The Gita answers this question very frankly. Those really learned
leaders of society like Brahma, Siva, Kapila, the Kumaras, Manu, Vyasa,
Devala, Asita, Janaka, Prahlada, Bali, and later on Madhvacarya,
Ramanujacarya, Sri Caitanya and many others--who are faithful
philosophers, politicians, educators, scientists, etc.--surrender to
the lotus feet of the Supreme Person, the all-powerful authority. Those
who are not actually philosophers, scientists, educators,
administrators, etc., but who pose themselves as such for material
gain, do not accept the plan or path of the Supreme Lord. They have no
idea of God; they simply manufacture their own worldly plans and
consequently complicate the problems of material existence in their
vain attempts to solve them. Because material energy (nature) is so
powerful, it can resist the unauthorized plans of the atheists and
baffle the knowledge of "planning commissions."
The atheistic plan-makers are described herein by the word duskrtinah,
or "miscreants." Krtina means one who has performed meritorious work.
The atheist planmaker is sometimes very intelligent and meritorious
also, because any gigantic plan, good or bad, must take intelligence to
execute. But because the atheist's brain is improperly utilized in
opposing the plan of the Supreme Lord, the atheistic planmaker is
called duskrtina, which indicates that his intelligence and efforts are
misdirected.



In the Gita it is clearly mentioned that material energy works fully
under the direction of the Supreme Lord. It has no independent
authority. It works as the shadow moves, in accordance with the
movements of the object. But still material energy is very powerful,
and the atheist, due to his godless temperament, cannot know how it
works; nor can he know the plan of the Supreme Lord. Under illusion and
the modes of passion and ignorance, all his plans are baffled, as in
the case of Hiranyakasipu and Ravana, whose plans were smashed to dust
although they were both materially learned as scientists, philosophers,
administrators and educators. These duskrtinas, or miscreants, are of
four different patterns, as outlined below.
(1) The mudhas are those who are grossly foolish, like hard-working
beasts of burden. They want to enjoy the fruits of their labor by
themselves, and so do not want to part with them for the Supreme. The
typical example of the beast of burden is the ass. This humble beast is
made to work very hard by his master. The ass does not really know for
whom he works so hard day and night. He remains satisfied by filling
his stomach with a bundle of grass, sleeping for a while under fear of
being beaten by his master, and satisfying his sex appetite at the risk
of being repeatedly kicked by the opposite party. The ass sings poetry
and philosophy sometimes, but this braying only disturbs others. This
is the position of the foolish fruitive worker who does not know for
whom he should work. He does not know that karma (action) is meant for
yajna (sacrifice).
Most often, those who work very hard day and night to clear the burden
of self-created duties say that they have no time to hear of the
immortality of the living being. To such mudhas, material gains, which
are destructible, are life's all in all--despite the fact that the
mudhas enjoy only a very small fraction of the fruit of labor.
Sometimes they spend sleepless days and nights for fruitive gain, and
although they may have ulcers or indigestion, they are satisfied with
practically no food; they are simply absorbed in working hard day and
night for the benefit of illusory masters. Ignorant of their real
master, the foolish workers waste their valuable time serving mammon.
Unfortunately, they never surrender to the supreme master of all
masters, nor do they take time to hear of Him from the proper sources.
The swine who eat the stool do not care to accept sweetmeats made of
sugar and ghee. Similarly, the foolish worker will untiringly continue
to hear of the sense-enjoyable tidings of the flickering mundane force
that moves the material world.
(2) Another class of duskrti, or miscreant, is called the naradhama, or
the lowest of mankind. Nara means human being, and adhama means the
lowest. Out of the 8,400,000 different species of living beings, there
are 400,000 human species. Out of these there are numerous lower forms
of human life that are mostly uncivilized. The civilized human beings
are those who have regulative principles of social, political and
religious life. Those who are socially and politically developed, but
who have no religious principles, must be considered naradhamas. Nor is
religion without God religion, because the purpose of following
religious principles is to know the Supreme Truth and man's relation
with Him. In the Gita the Personality of Godhead clearly states that
there is no authority above Him and that He is the Supreme Truth. The
civilized form of human life is meant for man's reviving the lost
consciousness of his eternal relation with the Supreme Truth, the
Personality of Godhead Sri Krsna, who is all-powerful. Whoever loses
this chance is classified as a naradhama. We get information from
revealed scriptures that when the baby is in the mother's womb (an
extremely uncomfortable situation) he prays to God for deliverance and



promises to worship Him alone as soon as he gets out. To pray to God
when he is in difficulty is a natural instinct in every living being
because he is eternally related with God. But after his deliverance,
the child forgets the difficulties of birth and forgets his deliverer
also, being influenced by maya, the illusory energy.
It is the duty of the guardians of children to revive the divine
consciousness dormant in them. The ten processes of reformatory
ceremonies, as enjoined in the Manu-smrti, which is the guide to
religious principles, are meant for reviving God consciousness in the
system of varnasrama. However, no process is strictly followed now in
any part of the world, and therefore 99.9 percent of the population is
naradhama.
When the whole population becomes naradhama, naturally all their so-
called education is made null and void by the all-powerful energy of
physical nature. According to the standard of the Gita, a learned man
is he who sees on equal terms the learned brahmana, the dog, the cow,
the elephant and the dog-eater. That is the vision of a true devotee.
Sri Nityananda Prabhu, who is the incarnation of Godhead as divine
master, delivered the typical naradhamas, the brothers Jagai and
Madhai, and showed how the mercy of a real devotee is bestowed upon the
lowest of mankind. So the naradhama who is condemned by the Personality
of Godhead can again revive his spiritual consciousness only by the
mercy of a devotee.
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, in propagating the bhagavata-dharma or
activities of the devotees, has recommended that people submissively
hear the message of the Personality of Godhead. The essence of this
message is Bhagavad-gita. The lowest amongst human beings can be
delivered by this submissive hearing process only, but unfortunately
they even deny giving an aural reception to these messages, and what to
speak of surrendering to the will of the Supreme Lord? Naradhamas, or
the lowest of mankind, will fully neglect the prime duty of the human
being.
(3) The next class of duskrti is called mayayapahrta-jnanah, or those
persons whose erudite knowledge has been nullified by the influence of
illusory material energy. They are mostly very learned fellows--great
philosophers, poets, literati, scientists, etc.--but the illusory
energy misguides them, and therefore they disobey the Supreme Lord.
There are a great number of mayayapahrta-jnanah at the present moment,
even amongst the scholars of the Gita. In the Gita, in plain and simple
language, it is stated that Sri Krsna is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. There is none equal to or greater than Him. He is mentioned as
the father of Brahma, the original father of all human beings. In fact,
Sri Krsna is said to be not only the father of Brahma but also the
father of all species of life. He is the root of the impersonal Brahman
and Paramatma; the Supersoul in every entity is His plenary portion. He
is the fountainhead of everything and everyone is advised to surrender
unto His lotus feet. Despite all these clear statements, the
mayayapahrta-jnanah deride the personality of the Supreme Lord and
consider Him merely another human being. They do not know that the
blessed form of human life is designed after the eternal and
transcendental feature of the Supreme Lord.
All the unauthorized interpretations of the Gita by the class of
mayayapahrta-jnanah, outside the purview of the parampara system, are
so many stumbling blocks on the path of spiritual understanding. The
deluded interpreters do not surrender unto the lotus feet of Sri Krsna,
nor do they teach others to follow this principle.
(4) The last class of duskrti is called asuram bhavam asritah, or those
of demonic principles. This class is openly atheistic. Some of them



argue that the Supreme Lord can never descend upon this material world,
but they are unable to give any tangible reasons as to why not. There
are others who make Him subordinate to the impersonal feature, although
the opposite is declared in the Gita. Envious of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the atheist will present a number of illicit
incarnations manufactured in the factory of his brain. Such persons
whose very principle of life is to decry the Personality of Godhead
cannot surrender unto the lotus feet of Sri Krsna.
Sri Yamunacarya Albandaru of South India said, "O my Lord! You are
unknowable to persons involved with atheistic principles, despite Your
uncommon qualities, features, and activities and despite Your
personality being confirmed by all the revealed scriptures in the
quality of goodness, and despite Your being acknowledged by the famous
authorities renowned for their depth of knowledge in the transcendental
science and situated in the godly qualities."
Therefore, (1) grossly foolish persons, (2) the lowest of mankind, (3)
the deluded speculators, and (4) the professed atheists, as above
mentioned, never surrender unto the lotus feet of the Personality of
Godhead in spite of all scriptural and authoritative advice.

TEXT 16

catur-vidha bhajante mam
janah sukrtino 'rjuna
arto jijnasur artharthi
jnani ca bharatarsabha

SYNONYMS

catuh-vidhah--four kinds of; bhajante--render services; mam--unto Me;
janah--persons; su-krtinah--those who are pious; arjuna--O Arjuna;
artah--the distressed; jijnasuh--the inquisitive; artha-arthi--one who
desires material gain; jnani--one who knows things as they are; ca--
also; bharata-rsabha--O great one amongst the descendants of Bharata.

TRANSLATION

O best among the Bharatas [Arjuna], four kinds of pious men render
devotional service unto Me--the distressed, the desirer of wealth, the
inquisitive, and he who is searching for knowledge of the Absolute.

PURPORT

Unlike the miscreants, these are adherents of the regulative principles
of the scriptures, and they are called sukrtinah, or those who obey the
rules and regulations of scriptures, the moral and social laws, and
are, more or less, devoted to the Supreme Lord. Out of these there are
four classes of men--those who are sometimes distressed, those who are
in need of money, those who are sometimes inquisitive, and those who
are sometimes searching after knowledge of the Absolute Truth. These
persons come to the Supreme Lord for devotional service under different
conditions. These are not pure devotees because they have some
aspiration to fulfill in exchange for devotional service. Pure
devotional service is without aspiration and without desire for
material profit. The Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.1.11) defines pure
devotion thus:

anyabhilasita-sunyam



jnana-karmady-anavrtam
anukulyena krsnanu-
silanam bhaktir uttama

"One should render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord
Krsna favorably and without desire for material profit or gain through
fruitive activities or philosophical speculation. That is called pure
devotional service."
When these four kinds of persons come to the Supreme Lord for
devotional service and are completely purified by the association of a
pure devotee, they also become pure devotees. As far as the miscreants
are concerned, for them devotional service is very difficult because
their lives are selfish, irregular and without spiritual goals. But
even some of them, by chance, when they come in contact with a pure
devotee, also become pure devotees.
Those who are always busy with fruitive activities come to the Lord in
material distress and at that time associate with pure devotees and
become, in their distress, devotees of the Lord. Those who are simply
frustrated also come sometimes to associate with the pure devotees and
become inquisitive to know about God. Similarly, when the dry
philosophers are frustrated in every field of knowledge, they sometimes
want to learn of God, and they come to the Supreme Lord to render
devotional service and thus transcend knowledge of the impersonal
Brahman and the localized Paramatma and come to the personal conception
of Godhead by the grace of the Supreme Lord or His pure devotee. On the
whole, when the distressed, the inquisitive, the seekers of knowledge,
and those who are in need of money are free from all material desires,
and when they fully understand that material remuneration has nothing
to do with spiritual improvement, they become pure devotees. As long as
such a purified stage is not attained, devotees in transcendental
service to the Lord are tainted with fruitive activities, and they
search after mundane knowledge, etc. So one has to transcend all this
before one can come to the stage of pure devotional service.

TEXT 17

tesam jnani nitya-yukta
eka-bhaktir visisyate
priyo hi jnanino 'tyartham
aham sa ca mama priyah

SYNONYMS

tesam--out of them; jnani--one in full knowledge; nitya-yuktah--always
engaged; eka--only one; bhaktih--in devotional service; visisyate--
especially; priyah--very dear; hi--certainly; jnaninah--person in
knowledge; atyartham--highly; aham--I am; sah--he; ca--also; mama--
Mine; priyah--dear.

TRANSLATION

Of these, the wise one who is in full knowledge in union with Me
through pure devotional service is the best. For I am very dear to him,
and he is dear to Me.

PURPORT



Free from all contaminations of material desires, the distressed, the
inquisitive, the penniless, and the seeker after supreme knowledge can
all become pure devotees. But out of them, he who is in knowledge of
the Absolute Truth and free from all material desires becomes a really
pure devotee of the Lord. And of the four orders, the devotee who is in
full knowledge and is at the same time engaged in devotional service
is, the Lord says, the best. By searching after knowledge one realizes
that his self is different from his material body, and when further
advanced he comes to the knowledge of impersonal Brahman and Paramatma.
When one is fully purified, he realizes that his constitutional
position is to be the eternal servant of God. So by association with
pure devotees, the inquisitive, the distressed, the seeker after
material amelioration and the man in knowledge all become themselves
pure. But in the preparatory stage, the man who is in full knowledge of
the Supreme Lord and is at the same time executing devotional service
is very dear to the Lord. He who is situated in pure knowledge of the
transcendence of the Supreme Personality of God is so protected in
devotional service that material contamination cannot touch him.

TEXT 18

udarah sarva evaite
jnani tv atmaiva me matam
asthitah sa hi yuktatma
mam evanuttamam gatim

SYNONYMS

udarah--magnanimous; sarve--all; eva--certainly; ete--these; jnani--one
who is in knowledge; tu--but; atma eva--just like Myself; me--My;
matam--opinion; asthitah--situated; sah--he; hi--certainly; yukta-atma-
-engaged in devotional service; mam--unto Me; eva--certainly;
anuttamam--the highest goal; gatim--destination.

TRANSLATION

All these devotees are undoubtedly magnanimous souls, but he who is
situated in knowledge of Me I consider verily to dwell in Me. Being
engaged in My transcendental service, he attains Me.

PURPORT

It is not that other devotees who are less complete in knowledge are
not dear to the Lord. The Lord says that all are magnanimous because
anyone who comes to the Lord for any purpose is called a mahatma or
great soul. The devotees who want some benefit out of devotional
service are accepted by the Lord because there is an exchange of
affection. Out of affection they ask the Lord for some material
benefit, and when they get it they become so satisfied that they also
advance in devotional service. But the devotee in full knowledge is
considered to be very dear to the Lord because his only purpose is to
serve the Supreme Lord with love and devotion. Such a devotee cannot
live a second without contacting or serving the Supreme Lord.
Similarly, the Supreme Lord is very fond of His devotee and cannot be
separated from him.
In the Srimad-Bhagavatam (9.4.68), the Lord says:

sadhavo hrdayam mahyam



sadhunam hrdayam tv aham
mad-anyat te na jananti
naham tebhyo manag api

"The devotees are always in My heart, and I am always in the hearts of
the devotees. The devotee does not know anything beyond Me, and I also
cannot forget the devotee. There is a very intimate relationship
between Me and the pure devotees. Pure devotees in full knowledge are
never out of spiritual touch, and therefore they are very much dear to
Me."

TEXT 19

bahunam janmanam ante
jnanavan mam prapadyate
vasudevah sarvam iti
sa mahatma su-durlabhah

SYNONYMS

bahunam--many; janmanam--births; ante--after; jnana-van--he possessing
knowledge; mam--unto Me; prapadyate--surrenders; vasudevah--cause of
all causes; sarvam--all; iti--thus; sah--such; maha-atma--great soul;
su-durlabhah--very rare.

TRANSLATION

After many births and deaths, he who is actually in knowledge
surrenders unto Me, knowing Me to be the cause of all causes and all
that is. Such a great soul is very rare.

PURPORT

The living entity, while executing devotional service or transcendental
rituals after many, many births, may actually become situated in
transcendental pure knowledge that the Supreme Personality of Godhead
is the ultimate goal of spiritual realization. In the beginning of
spiritual realization, while one is trying to give up one's attachment
to materialism, there is some leaning towards impersonalism, but when
one is further advanced he can understand that there are activities in
the spiritual life and that these activities constitute devotional
service. Realizing this, he becomes attached to the Supreme Personality
of Godhead and surrenders to Him. At such a time one can understand
that Lord Sri Krsna's mercy is everything, that He is the cause of all
causes and that this material manifestation is not independent from
Him. He realizes the material world to be a perverted reflection of
spiritual variegatedness and realizes that in everything there is a
relationship with the Supreme Lord Krsna. Thus he thinks of everything
in relation to Vasudeva, or Sri Krsna. Such a universal vision of
Vasudeva precipitates one's full surrender to the Supreme Lord Sri
Krsna as the highest goal. Such surrendered great souls are very rare.
This verse is very nicely explained in the Third Chapter (verses 14 and
15) of the Svetasvatara Upanisad: "In this body there are powers of
speaking, of seeing, of hearing, of mental activities, etc. But these
are not important if not related to the Supreme Lord and because
Vasudeva is all-pervading and everything is Vasudeva, the devotee
surrenders in full knowledge (cf. Bhagavad-gita 7.17 and 11.40).



TEXT 20

kamais tais tair hrta-jnanah
prapadyante 'nya-devatah
tam tam niyamam asthaya
prakrtya niyatah svaya

SYNONYMS

kamaih--by desires; taih--by those; taih--by those; hrta--distorted;
jnanah--knowledge; prapadyante--surrender; anya--other; devatah--
demigods; tam--that; tam--that; niyamam--rules; asthaya--following;
prakrtya--by nature; niyatah--controlled; svaya--by their own.

TRANSLATION

Those whose minds are distorted by material desires surrender unto
demigods and follow the particular rules and regulations of worship
according to their own natures.

PURPORT

Those who are freed from all material contaminations surrender unto the
Supreme Lord and engage in His devotional service. As long as the
material contamination is not completely washed off, they are by nature
nondevotees. But even those who have material desires and who resort to
the Supreme Lord are not so much attracted by external nature; because
of approaching the right goal, they soon become free from all material
lust. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is recommended that whether one is
free from all material desires, or is full of material desires, or
desires liberation from material contamination, or is a pure devotee
and has no desire for material sense gratification, he should in all
cases surrender to Vasudeva and worship Him.
It is said in the Bhagavatam that less intelligent people who have lost
their spiritual sense take shelter of demigods for immediate
fulfillment of material desires. Generally, such people do not go to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, because they are in particular
modes of nature (ignorance and passion) and therefore worship various
demigods. Following the rules and regulations of worship, they are
satisfied. The worshipers of demigods are motivated by small desires
and do not know how to reach the supreme goal, but a devotee of the
Supreme Lord is not misguided. Because in Vedic literature there are
recommendations for worshiping different gods for different purposes
(e.g., a diseased man is recommended to worship the sun), those who are
not devotees of the Lord think that for certain purposes demigods are
better than the Supreme Lord. But a pure devotee knows that the Supreme
Lord Krsna is the master of all. In the Caitanya-caritamrta (Adi 5.142)
it is said, ekale isvara krsna, ara saba bhrtya: only the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Krsna, is master, and all others are servants.
Therefore a pure devotee never goes to demigods for satisfaction of his
material needs. He depends on the Supreme Lord. And the pure devotee is
satisfied with whatever He gives.

TEXT 21

yo yo yam yam tanum bhaktah
sraddhayarcitum icchati
tasya tasyacalam sraddham



tam eva vidadhamy aham

SYNONYMS

yah--that; yah--that; yam--which; yam--which; tanum--form of the
demigods; bhaktah--devotee; sraddhaya--with faith; arcitum--to worship;
icchati--desires; tasya--of that; tasya--of that; acalam--steady;
sraddham--faith; tam--him; eva--surely; vidadhami--give; aham--I.

TRANSLATION

I am in everyone's heart as the Supersoul. As soon as one desires to
worship the demigods, I make his faith steady so that he can devote
himself to some particular deity.

PURPORT

God has given independence to everyone; therefore, if a person desires
to have material enjoyment and wants very sincerely to have such
facilities from the material demigods, the Supreme Lord, as Supersoul
in everyone's heart, understands and gives facilities to such persons.
As the supreme father of all living entities, He does not interfere
with their independence, but gives all facilities so that they can
fulfill their material desires. Some may ask why the all-powerful God
gives facilities to the living entities for enjoying this material
world and so lets them fall into the trap of the illusory energy. The
answer is that if the Supreme Lord as Supersoul does not give such
facilities, then there is no meaning to independence. Therefore He
gives everyone full independence--whatever one likes--but His ultimate
instruction we find in the Bhagavad-gita: man should give up all other
engagements and fully surrender unto Him. That will make man happy.
Both the living entity and the demigods are subordinate to the will of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; therefore the living entity cannot
worship the demigod by his own desire, nor can the demigod bestow any
benediction without the supreme will. As it is said, not a blade of
grass moves without the will of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Generally, persons who are distressed in the material world go to the
demigods, as they are advised in the Vedic literature. A person wanting
some particular thing may worship such and such a demigod. For example,
a diseased person is recommended to worship the sun-god; a person
wanting education may worship the goddess of learning, Sarasvati; and a
person wanting a beautiful wife may worship the goddess Uma, the wife
of Lord Siva. In this way there are recommendations in the sastras
(Vedic scriptures) for different modes of worship of different
demigods. And because a particular living entity wants to enjoy a
particular material facility, the Lord inspires him with a strong
desire to achieve that benediction from that particular demigod, and so
he successfully receives the benediction. The particular mode of the
devotional attitude of the living entity toward a particular type of
demigod is also arranged by the Supreme Lord. The demigods cannot
infuse the living entities with such an affinity, but because He is the
Supreme Lord or the Supersoul who is present in the hearts of all
living entities, Krsna gives impetus to man to worship certain
demigods. The demigods are actually different parts of the universal
body of the Supreme Lord; therefore they have no independence. In the
Vedic literature it is stated: "The Supreme Personality of Godhead as
Supersoul is also present within the heart of the demigod; therefore He
arranges through the demigod to fulfill the desire of the living



entity. But both the demigod and the living entity are dependent on the
supreme will. They are not independent."

TEXT 22

sa taya sraddhaya yuktas
tasyaradhanam ihate
labhate ca tatah kaman
mayaiva vihitan hi tan

SYNONYMS

sah--he; taya--with that; sraddhaya--with faith; yuktah--endowed;
tasya--his; aradhanam--worship; ihate--seeks; labhate--obtains; ca--
and; tatah--from which; kaman--desires; maya--by Me; eva--alone;
vihitan--regulated; hi--for; tan--those.

TRANSLATION

Endowed with such a faith, he seeks favors of a particular demigod and
obtains his desires. But in actuality these benefits are bestowed by Me
alone.

PURPORT

The demigods cannot award benedictions to the devotees without the
permission of the Supreme Lord. The living entity may forget that
everything is the property of the Supreme Lord, but the demigods do not
forget. So the worship of demigods and achievement of desired results
are due not to the demigods but to the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
by arrangement. The less intelligent living entity does not know this,
and therefore he foolishly goes to the demigods for some benefit. But
the pure devotee, when in need of something, prays only to the Supreme
Lord. Asking for material benefit, however, is not a sign of a pure
devotee. A living entity goes to the demigods usually because he is mad
to fulfill his lust. This happens when something undue is desired by
the living entity and the Lord Himself does not fulfill the desire. In
the Caitanya-caritamrta it is said that one who worships the Supreme
Lord and at the same time desires material enjoyment is contradictory
in his desires. Devotional service of the Supreme Lord and the worship
of a demigod cannot be on the same platform because worship of a
demigod is material and devotional service to the Supreme Lord is
completely spiritual.
For the living entity who desires to return to Godhead, material
desires are impediments. A pure devotee of the Lord is therefore not
awarded the material benefits desired by less intelligent living
entities who prefer to worship demigods of the material world rather
than engage in devotional service of the Supreme Lord.

TEXT 23

antavat tu phalam tesam
tad bhavaty alpa-medhasam
devan deva-yajo yanti
mad-bhakta yanti mam api

SYNONYMS



anta-vat tu--limited and temporary; phalam--fruits; tesam--their; tat--
that; bhavati--becomes; alpa-medhasam--of those of small intelligence;
devan--demigods' planets; deva-yajah--worshipers of demigods; yanti--
achieve; mat--My; bhaktah--devotees; yanti--attain; mam--to Me; api--
surely.

TRANSLATION

Men of small intelligence worship the demigods, and their fruits are
limited and temporary. Those who worship the demigods go to the planets
of the demigods, but My devotees ultimately reach My supreme planet.

PURPORT

Some commentators on the Gita say that one who worships a demigod can
reach the Supreme Lord, but here it is clearly stated that the
worshipers of demigods go to the different planetary systems where
various demigods are situated, just as a worshiper of the sun achieves
the sun or a worshiper of the demigod of the moon achieves the moon.
Similarly, if anyone wants to worship a demigod like Indra, he can
attain that particular god's planet. It is not that everyone,
regardless of whatever demigod is worshiped, will reach the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. That is denied here, for it is clearly stated
that the worshipers of the demigods go to different planets in the
material world, but the devotee of the Supreme Lord goes directly to
the supreme planet of the Personality of Godhead.
Here the point may be raised that if the demigods are different parts
of the body of the Supreme Lord, then the same end should be achieved
by worshiping them. However, worshipers of the demigods are less
intelligent because they don't know to what part of the body food must
be supplied. Some of them are so foolish that they claim that there are
many parts and many ways to supply food. This isn't very sanguine. Can
anyone supply food to the body through the ears or eyes? They do not
know that these demigods are different parts of the universal body of
the Supreme Lord, and in their ignorance they believe that each and
every demigod is a separate God and a competitor of the Supreme Lord.
Not only are demigods parts of the Supreme Lord, but ordinary living
entities are also. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is stated that the
brahmanas are the head of the Supreme Lord, the ksatriyas are the arms,
etc., and that all serve different functions. Regardless of the
situation, if one knows that both the demigods and himself are part and
parcel of the Supreme Lord, his knowledge is perfect. But if he does
not understand this, he achieves different planets where the demigods
reside. This is not the same destination the devotee reaches.
The results achieved by the demigods' benedictions are perishable
because within this material world the planets, the demigods and their
worshipers are all perishable. Therefore it is clearly stated in this
verse that all results achieved by worshiping demigods are perishable,
and therefore such worship is performed by the less intelligent living
entity. Because the pure devotee engaged in Krsna consciousness in
devotional service of the Supreme Lord achieves eternal blissful
existence that is full of knowledge, his achievements and those of the
common worshiper of the demigods are different. The Supreme Lord is
unlimited; His favor is unlimited; His mercy is unlimited. Therefore
the mercy of the Supreme Lord upon His pure devotees is unlimited.

TEXT 24



avyaktam vyaktim apannam
manyante mam abuddhayah
param bhavam ajananto
mamavyayam anuttamam

SYNONYMS

avyaktam--nonmanifested; vyaktim--personality; apannam--achieved;
manyante--think; mam--unto Me; abuddhayah--less intelligent persons;
param--supreme; bhavam--state of being; ajanantah--without knowing;
mama--My; avyayam--imperishable; anuttamam--the finest.

TRANSLATION

Unintelligent men, who know Me not, think that I have assumed this form
and personality. Due to their small knowledge, they do not know My
higher nature, which is changeless and supreme.

PURPORT

Those who are worshipers of demigods have been described as less
intelligent persons, and here the impersonalists are similarly
described. Lord Krsna in His personal form is here speaking before
Arjuna, and still, due to ignorance, impersonalists argue that the
Supreme Lord ultimately has no form. Yamunacarya, a great devotee of
the Lord in the disciplic succession from Ramanujacarya, has written
two very appropriate verses in this connection. He says,
"My dear Lord, devotees like Vyasadeva and Narada know You to be the
Personality of Godhead. By understanding different Vedic literatures,
one can come to know Your characteristics, Your form and Your
activities, and one can thus understand that You are the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. But those who are in the modes of passion and
ignorance, the demons, the nondevotees, cannot understand You. They are
unable to understand You. However expert such nondevotees may be in
discussing Vedanta and the Upanisads and other Vedic literatures, it is
not possible for them to understand the Personality of Godhead."
(Stotra-ratna 12)
In the Brahma-samhita it is stated that the Personality of Godhead
cannot be understood simply by study of the Vedanta literature. Only by
the mercy of the Supreme Lord can the Personality of the Supreme be
known. Therefore in this verse it is clearly stated that not only are
the worshipers of the demigods less intelligent, but those nondevotees
who are engaged in Vedanta and speculation on Vedic literature without
any tinge of true Krsna consciousness are also less intelligent, and
for them it is not possible to understand God's personal nature.
Persons who are under the impression that the Absolute Truth is
impersonal are described as abuddhayah, which means one who does not
know the ultimate feature of the Absolute Truth. In the Srimad-
Bhagavatam it is stated that supreme realization begins from the
impersonal Brahman and then rises to the localized Supersoul--but the
ultimate word in the Absolute Truth is the Personality of Godhead.
Modern impersonalists are still less intelligent, for they do not even
follow their great predecessor, Sankaracarya, who has specifically
stated that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Impersonalists, therefore, not knowing the Supreme Truth, think Krsna
to be only the son of Devaki and Vasudeva, or a prince, or a powerful
living entity. This is also condemned in the Bhagavad-gita (9.11).



Avajananti mam mudha manusim tanum asritam: "Only the fools regard Me
as an ordinary person."
The fact is that no one can understand Krsna without rendering
devotional service and without developing Krsna consciousness. The Gita
confirms this.
One cannot understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, or His
form, quality or name simply by mental speculation or by discussing
Vedic literature. One must understand Him by devotional service. When
one is fully engaged in Krsna consciousness, beginning by chanting the
maha-mantra--Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama,
Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare--then only can one understand the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Nondevotee impersonalists think that
Krsna has a body made of this material nature and that all His
activities, His form and everything, are maya. These impersonalists are
known as Mayavadis. They do not know the ultimate truth.
The twentieth verse clearly states, kamais tais tair hrta-jnanah
prapadyante 'nya-devatah. "Those who are blinded by lusty desires
surrender unto the different demigods." It is accepted that besides the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, there are demigods who have their
different planets, and the Lord also has a planet. As stated in the
twenty-third verse, devan deva-yajo yanti mad-bhakta yanti mam api: the
worshipers of the demigods go to the different planets of the demigods,
and those who are devotees of Lord Krsna go to the Krsnaloka planet.
Although this is clearly stated, the foolish impersonalists still
maintain that the Lord is formless and that these forms are
impositions. From the study of the Gita does it appear that the
demigods and their abodes are impersonal? Clearly, neither the demigods
nor Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, are impersonal. They are
all persons; Lord Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and He
has His own planet, and the demigods have theirs.
Therefore the monistic contention that ultimate truth is formless and
that form is imposed does not hold true. It is clearly stated here that
it is not imposed. From the Gita we can clearly understand that the
forms of the demigods and the form of the Supreme Lord are
simultaneously existing and that Lord Krsna is sac-cid-ananda, eternal
blissful knowledge. The Vedas also confirm that the Supreme Absolute
Truth is ananda-mayo, or by nature full of blissful pleasure, and that
He is abhyasat, by nature the reservoir of unlimited auspicious
qualities. And in the Gita the Lord says that although He is aja
(unborn), He still appears. These are the facts that we should
understand from the Bhagavad-gita. We cannot understand how the Supreme
Personality of Godhead can be impersonal; the imposition theory of the
impersonalist monist is false as far as the statements of the Gita are
concerned. It is clear herein that the Supreme Absolute Truth, Lord
Krsna, has both form and personality.

TEXT 25

naham prakasah sarvasya
yoga-maya-samavrtah
mudho 'yam nabhijanati
loko mam ajam avyayam

SYNONYMS

na--nor; aham--I; prakasah--manifest; sarvasya--to everyone; yoga-maya-
-internal potency; samavrtah--covered; mudhah--foolish; ayam--this; na-



-not; abhijanati--can understand; lokah--such less intelligent persons;
mam--Me; ajam--unborn; avyayam--inexhaustible.

TRANSLATION

I am never manifest to the foolish and unintelligent. For them I am
covered by My eternal creative potency [yoga-maya]; and so the deluded
world knows Me not, who am unborn and infallible.

PURPORT

It may be argued that since Krsna was present on this earth and was
visible to everyone, then why isn't He manifest to everyone now? But
actually He was not manifest to everyone. When Krsna was present there
were only a few people who could understand Him to be the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. In the assembly of Kurus, when Sisupala spoke
against Krsna being elected president of the assembly, Bhisma supported
Him and proclaimed Him to be the Supreme God. Similarly, the Pandavas
and a few others knew that He was the Supreme, but not everyone. He was
not revealed to the nondevotees and the common man. Therefore in the
Gita Krsna says that but for His pure devotees, all men consider Him to
be like themselves. He was manifest only to His devotees as the
reservoir of all pleasure. But to others, to unintelligent nondevotees,
He was covered by His internal potency.
In the prayers of Kunti in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.8.19) it is said
that the Lord is covered by the curtain of yoga-maya and thus ordinary
people cannot understand Him. This yoga-maya curtain is also confirmed
in the Isopanisad (mantra 15), in which the devotee prays:
"O my Lord, You are the maintainer of the entire universe, and
devotional service to You is the highest religious principle.
Therefore, I pray that You will also maintain me. Your transcendental
form is covered by the yoga-maya. The brahmajyoti is the covering of
the internal potency. May You kindly remove this glowing effulgence
that impedes my seeing Your sac-cid-ananda-vigraha, Your eternal form
of bliss and knowledge."
This yoga-maya curtain is also mentioned in the Fifteenth Chapter of
the Gita. The Supreme Personality of Godhead in His transcendental form
of bliss and knowledge is covered by the internal potency of the
brahmajyoti, and the less intelligent impersonalists cannot see the
Supreme on this account. Also in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.14.7) there
is this prayer by Brahma: "O Supreme Personality of Godhead, O
Supersoul, O master of all mystery, who can calculate Your potency and
pastimes in this world? You are always expanding Your internal potency,
and therefore no one can understand You. Learned scientists and learned
scholars can examine the atomic constitution of the material world or
even the planets, but still they are unable to calculate Your energy
and potency, although You are present before them." The Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Lord Krsna, is not only unborn but also avyaya,
inexhaustible. His eternal form is bliss and knowledge, and His
energies are all inexhaustible.

TEXT 26

vedaham samatitani
vartamanani carjuna
bhavisyani ca bhutani
mam tu veda na kascana



SYNONYMS

veda--know; aham--I; sama--equally; a titani--past; vartamanani--
present; ca--and; arjuna--O Arjuna; bhavisyani--future; ca--also;
bhutani--living entities; mam--Me; tu--but; veda--knows; na--not;
kascana--anyone.

TRANSLATION

O Arjuna, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, I know everything that
has happened in the past, all that is happening in the present, and all
things that are yet to come. I also know all living entities; but Me no
one knows.

PURPORT

Here the question of personality and impersonality is clearly stated.
If Krsna, the form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is considered
by the impersonalists to be maya, to be material, then He would, like
the living entity, change His body and forget everything in His past
life. Anyone with a material body cannot remember his past life, nor
can he foretell his future life, nor can he predict the outcome of his
present life; therefore he cannot know what is happening in past,
present and future. Unless one is liberated from material
contamination, he cannot know past, present and future.
Unlike the ordinary human being, Lord Krsna clearly says that He
completely knows what happened in the past, what is happening in the
present, and what will happen in the future. In the Fourth Chapter we
have seen that Lord Krsna remembers instructing Vivasvan, the sun-god,
millions of years ago. Krsna knows every living entity because He is
situated in every living being's heart as the Supreme Soul. But despite
His presence in every living entity as Supersoul and His presence
beyond the material sky, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
less intelligent cannot realize Him as the Supreme Person. Certainly
the transcendental body of Sri Krsna is not perishable. He is just like
the sun, and maya is like the cloud. In the material world we can see
that there is the sun and that there are clouds and different stars and
planets. The clouds may cover all these in the sky temporarily, but
this covering is only apparent to our limited vision. The sun, moon and
stars are not actually covered. Similarly, maya cannot cover the
Supreme Lord. By His internal potency He is not manifest to the less
intelligent class of men. As it is stated in the third verse of this
chapter, out of millions and millions of men, some try to become
perfect in this human form of life, and out of thousands and thousands
of such perfected men, hardly one can understand what Lord Krsna is.
Even if one is perfected by realization of impersonal Brahman or
localized Paramatma, he cannot possibly understand the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, without being in Krsna
consciousness.

TEXT 27

iccha-dvesa-samutthena
dvandva-mohena bharata
sarva-bhutani sammoham
sarge yanti parantapa

SYNONYMS



iccha--desire; dvesa--hate; samutthena--born; dvandva--duality; mohena-
-overcome; bharata--O scion of Bharata; sarva--all; bhutani--living
entities; sammoham--into delusion; sarge--in creation; yanti--go;
parantapa--O conqueror of enemies.

TRANSLATION

O scion of Bharata [Arjuna], O conqueror of the foe, all living
entities are born into delusion, overcome by the dualities of desire
and hate.

PURPORT

The real constitutional position of the living entity is that of
subordination to the Supreme Lord, who is pure knowledge. When one is
deluded into separation from this pure knowledge, he becomes controlled
by illusory energy and cannot understand the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. The illusory energy is manifested in the duality of desire and
hate. Due to desire and hate, the ignorant person wants to become one
with the Supreme Lord and envies Krsna as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Pure devotees, who are not so deluded or contaminated by
desire and hate, can understand that Lord Sri Krsna appears by His
internal potencies, but those who are deluded by duality and nescience
think that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is created by material
energies. This is their misfortune. Such deluded persons,
symptomatically, dwell in dualities of dishonor and honor, misery and
happiness, woman and man, good and bad, pleasure and pain, etc.,
thinking, "This is my wife; this is my house; I am the master of this
house; I am the husband of this wife." These are the dualities of
delusion. Those who are so deluded by dualities are completely foolish
and therefore cannot understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 28

yesam tv anta-gatam papam
jananam punya-karmanam
te dvandva-moha-nirmukta
bhajante mam drdha-vratah

SYNONYMS

yesam--whose; tu--but; anta-gatam--completely eradicated; papam--sin;
jananam--of the persons; punya--pious; karmanam--previous activities;
te--they; dvandva--duality; moha--delusion; nirmuktah--free from;
bhajante--worship; mam--Me; drdha-vratah--with determination.

TRANSLATION

Persons who have acted piously in previous lives and in this life,
whose sinful actions are completely eradicated and who are freed from
the duality of delusion, engage themselves in My service with
determination.

PURPORT

Those eligible for elevation to the transcendental position are
mentioned in this verse. For those who are sinful, atheistic, foolish



and deceitful, it is very difficult to transcend the duality of desire
and hate. Only those who have passed their lives in practicing the
regulative principles of religion, who have acted piously and who have
conquered sinful reactions can accept devotional service and gradually
rise to the pure knowledge of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Then,
gradually, they can meditate in trance on the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. That is the process of being situated on the spiritual
platform. This elevation is possible in Krsna consciousness in the
association of pure devotees who can deliver one from delusion.
It is stated in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (5.5.2) that if one actually
wants to be liberated he must render service to the devotees (mahat-
sevam dvaram ahur vimukteh); but one who associates with materialistic
people is on the path leading to the darkest region of existence (tamo-
dvaram yositam sangi-sangam). All the devotees of the Lord traverse
this earth just to recover the conditioned souls from their delusion.
The impersonalists do not know that forgetting their constitutional
position as subordinate to the Supreme Lord is the greatest violation
of God's law. Unless one is reinstated in his own constitutional
position, it is not possible to understand the Supreme Personality or
to be fully engaged in His transcendental loving service with
determination.

TEXT 29

jara-marana-moksaya
mam asritya yatanti ye
te brahma tad viduh krtsnam
adhyatmam karma cakhilam

SYNONYMS

jara--old age; marana--death; moksaya--for the purpose of liberation;
mam--unto Me; asritya--taking shelter of; yatanti--endeavor; ye--all
those; te--such persons; brahma--Brahman; tat--actually that; viduh--
they know; krtsnam--everything; adhyatmam--transcendental; karma--
fruitive activities; ca--and; akhilam--entirely.

TRANSLATION

Intelligent persons who are endeavoring for liberation from old age and
death take refuge in Me in devotional service. They are actually
Brahman because they entirely know everything about transcendental and
fruitive activities.

PURPORT

Birth, death, old age and diseases affect this material body, but not
the spiritual body. There is no birth, death, old age and disease for
the spiritual body, so one who attains a spiritual body, becomes one of
the associates of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and engages in
eternal devotional service, is really liberated. Aham brahmasmi: I am
spirit. It is said that one should understand that he is Brahman--
spirit soul. This Brahman conception of life is also in devotional
service, as described in this verse. The pure devotees are
transcendentally situated on the Brahman platform, and they know
everything about transcendental and material activities.



Four kinds of impure devotees who engage themselves in the
transcendental service of the Lord achieve their respective goals, and
by the grace of the Supreme Lord, when they are fully Krsna conscious,
they actually enjoy spiritual association with the Supreme Lord. But
those who are worshipers of demigods never reach the Supreme Lord in
His supreme planet. Even the less intelligent Brahman-realized persons
cannot reach the supreme planet of Krsna known as Goloka Vrndavana.
Only persons who perform activities in Krsna consciousness (mam
asritya) are actually entitled to be called Brahman, because they are
actually endeavoring to reach the Krsna planet. Such persons have no
misgivings about Krsna, and thus they are factually Brahman.
Those who are engaged in worshiping the form or arca of the Lord, or
who are engaged in meditation on the Lord simply for liberation from
material bondage, also know, by the grace of the Lord, the purports of
Brahman, adhibhuta, etc., as explained by the Lord in the next chapter.

TEXT 30

sadhibhutadhidaivam mam
sadhiyajnam ca ye viduh
prayana-kale 'pi ca mam
te vidur yukta-cetasah

SYNONYMS

sa-adhibhuta--the governing principle of the material manifestation;
adhidaivam--underlying all the demigods; mam--Me; sa-adhiyajnam--
sustaining all sacrifices; ca--and; ye--those; viduh--know; prayana--of
death; kale--at the time; api--even; ca--and; mam--Me; te--they; viduh-
-know; yukta-cetasah--with steadfast minds.

TRANSLATION

Those who know Me as the Supreme Lord, as the governing principle of
the material manifestation, who know Me as the one underlying all the
demigods and as the one sustaining all sacrifices, can, with steadfast
mind, understand and know Me, even at the time of death.

PURPORT

Persons acting in Krsna consciousness are never entirely deviated from
the path of understanding the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In the
transcendental association of Krsna consciousness, one can understand
how the Supreme Lord is the governing principle of the material
manifestation and even of the demigods. Gradually, by such
transcendental association, one becomes convinced of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead Himself, and at the time of death such a Krsna
conscious person can never forget Krsna. Naturally he is thus promoted
to the planet of the Supreme Lord, Goloka Vrndavana.
This Seventh Chapter particularly explains how one can become a fully
Krsna conscious person. The beginning of Krsna consciousness is
association of persons who are in Krsna consciousness. Such association
is spiritual and puts one directly in touch with the Supreme Lord, and,
by His grace, one can understand Krsna to be the Supreme God. At the
same time one can really understand the constitutional position of the
living entity and how the living entity forgets Krsna and becomes
entangled in material activities. By gradual development of Krsna
consciousness in good association, the living entity can understand



that due to forgetfulness of Krsna he has become conditioned by the
laws of material nature. He can also understand that this human form of
life is an opportunity to regain Krsna consciousness and that it should
be fully utilized to attain the causeless mercy of the Supreme Lord.
Many subjects have been discussed in this chapter: the man in distress,
the inquisitive man, the man in want of material necessities, knowledge
of Brahman, knowledge of Paramatma, liberation from birth, death and
diseases, and worship of the Supreme Lord. However, he who is actually
elevated in Krsna consciousness does not care for the different
processes. He simply directly engages himself in activities of Krsna
consciousness and thereby factually attains his constitutional position
as an eternal servitor of Lord Krsna. In such a situation he takes
pleasure in hearing and glorifying the Supreme Lord in pure devotional
service. He is convinced that by doing so, all his objectives will be
fulfilled. This determined faith is called drdha-vrata, and that is the
beginning of bhakti-yoga or transcendental loving service. That is the
verdict of all scriptures. This Seventh Chapter of the Gita is the
substance of that conviction.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Seventh Chapter of the
Srimad Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Knowledge of the Absolute.

Chapter 8
Attaining the Supreme

TEXT 1

arjuna uvaca
kim tad brahma kim adhyatmam
kim karma purusottama
adhibhutam ca kim proktam
adhidaivam kim ucyate

SYNONYMS

arjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; kim--what; tat--that; brahma--Brahman; kim-
-what; adhyatmam--the self; kim--what; karma--fruitive activities;
purusa-uttama--O Supreme Person; adhibhutam--the material
manifestation; ca--and; kim--what; proktam--is called; adhidaivam--the
demigods; kim--what; ucyate--is called.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna inquired: O my Lord, O Supreme Person, what is Brahman? What is
the self? What are fruitive activities? What is this material
manifestation? And what are the demigods? Please explain this to me.

PURPORT

In this chapter Lord Krsna answers these different questions from
Arjuna beginning with, "What is Brahman?" The Lord also explains karma,
fruitive activities, devotional service and yoga principles, and
devotional service in its pure form. The Srimad-Bhagavatam explains
that the Supreme Absolute Truth is known as Brahman, Paramatma, and
Bhagavan. In addition, the living entity, individual soul, is also
called Brahman. Arjuna also inquires about atma, which refers to body,
soul and mind. According to the Vedic dictionary, atma refers to the
mind, soul, body and senses also.



Arjuna has addressed the Supreme Lord as Purusottama, Supreme Person,
which means that he was putting these questions not simply to a friend
but to the Supreme Person, knowing Him to be the supreme authority able
to give definitive answers.

TEXT 2

adhiyajnah katham ko 'tra
dehe 'smin madhusudana
prayana-kale ca katham
jneyo 'si niyatatmabhih

SYNONYMS

adhiyajnah--the Lord of sacrifice; katham--how; kah--who; atra--here;
dehe--in the body; asmin--in this; madhusudana--O Madhusudana; prayana-
kale--at the time of death; ca--and; katham--how; jneyah--be known;
asi--You can; niyata-atmabhih--by the self-controlled.

TRANSLATION

How does this Lord of sacrifice live in the body, and in which part
does He live, O Madhusudana? And how can those engaged in devotional
service know You at the time of death?

PURPORT

"Lord of sacrifice" may refer to either Indra or Visnu. Visnu is the
chief of the primal demigods, including Brahma and Siva, and Indra is
the chief of the administrative demigods. Both Indra and Visnu are
worshiped by yajna performances. But here Arjuna asks who is actually
the Lord of yajna (sacrifice) and how is the Lord residing within the
body of the living entity.
Arjuna addresses the Lord as Madhusudana because Krsna once killed a
demon named Madhu. Actually these questions, which are of the nature of
doubts, should not have arisen in the mind of Arjuna because Arjuna is
a Krsna conscious devotee. Therefore these doubts are like demons.
Since Krsna is so expert in killing demons, Arjuna here addresses Him
as Madhusudana so that Krsna might kill the demonic doubts that arise
in Arjuna's mind.
Now the word prayana-kale in this verse is very significant because
whatever we do in life will be tested at the time of death. Arjuna
fears that at the time of death, those who are in Krsna consciousness
will forget the Supreme Lord because at such a time body functions are
disrupted and the mind may be in a panic-stricken state. Therefore
Maharaja Kulasekhara, a great devotee, prays, "My dear Lord, may I die
immediately now that I am healthy so that the swan of my mind may enter
into the stem of Thy lotus feet." This metaphor is used because the
swan often takes pleasure in entering the stem of the lotus flower--
similarly, the mind of the pure devotee is drawn to the lotus feet of
the Lord.  Maharaja Kulasekhara fears that at the moment of death his
throat will be so choked up that he will not be able to chant the holy
names, so it is better to "die immediately." Arjuna questions how one's
mind can remain fixed on Krsna's lotus feet at such times.

TEXT 3

sri-bhagavan uvaca



aksaram brahma paramam
svabhavo 'dhyatmam ucyate
bhuta-bhavodbhava-karo
visargah karma-samjnitah

SYNONYMS

sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; aksaram--
indestructible; brahma--Brahman; paramam--transcendental; svabhavah--
eternal nature; adhyatmam--the self; ucyate--is called; bhuta-bhava-
udbhava-karah--action producing the material bodies of the living
entities; visargah--creation; karma--fruitive activities; samjnitah--is
called.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Lord said: The indestructible, transcendental living entity
is called Brahman and his eternal nature is called the self. Action
pertaining to the development of these material bodies is called karma,
or fruitive activities.

PURPORT

Brahman is indestructible and eternally existing, and its constitution
is not changed at any time. Beyond Brahman there is Parabrahman.
Brahman refers to the living entity, and Parabrahman refers to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The constitutional position of the
living entity is different from the position he takes in the material
world. In material consciousness, his nature is to try to be the lord
of matter, but in spiritual (Krsna) consciousness, his position is to
serve the Supreme. When the living entity is in material consciousness,
he has to take on various bodies in the material world. That is called
karma, or varied creation by the force of material consciousness.
In Vedic literature the living entity is called jivatma and Brahman,
but he is never called Parabrahman. The living entity (jivatma) takes
different positions--sometimes he merges into the dark material nature
and identifies himself with matter, and sometimes he identifies himself
with the superior spiritual nature. Therefore he is called the Supreme
Lord's marginal energy. According to his identification with material
or spiritual nature, he receives a material or spiritual body. In
material nature he may take a body from any of the 8,400,000 species of
life, but in spiritual nature he has only one body. In material nature
he is sometimes manifested as a man, demigod, animal, beast, bird,
etc., according to his karma. To attain material heavenly planets and
enjoy their facilities, he sometimes performs sacrifices (yajna), but
when his merit is exhausted, he returns to earth again in the form of a
man.
In the process of sacrifice, the living entity makes specific
sacrifices to attain specific heavenly planets and consequently reaches
them. When the merit of sacrifice is exhausted, then the living entity
descends to earth in the form of rain, then takes on the form of
grains, and the grains are eaten by man and transformed into semen,
which impregnates a woman, and thus the living entity once again
attains the human form to perform sacrifice and so repeat the same
cycle. In this way, the living entity perpetually comes and goes on the
material path. The Krsna conscious person, however, avoids such
sacrifices. He takes directly to Krsna consciousness and thereby
prepares himself to return to Godhead.



Impersonalist commentators on the Gita unreasonably assume that Brahman
takes the form of jiva in the material world, and to substantiate this
they refer to Chapter Fifteen, verse 7, of the Gita. But this verse
also speaks of the living entity as "an eternal fragment of Myself."
The fragment of God, the living entity, may fall down into the material
world, but the Supreme Lord (Acyuta) never falls down. Therefore this
assumption that the Supreme Brahman assumes the form of jiva is not
acceptable. It is important to remember that in Vedic literature
Brahman (the living entity) is distinguished from Parabrahman (the
Supreme Lord).

TEXT 4

adhibhutam ksaro bhavah
purusas cadhidaivatam
adhiyajno 'ham evatra
dehe deha-bhrtam vara

SYNONYMS

adhibhutam--the physical manifestation; ksarah--constantly changing;
bhavah--nature; purusah--the universal form; ca--and; adhidaivatam--
including all demigods like the sun and moon; adhiyajnah--the
Supersoul; aham--I (Krsna); eva--certainly; atra--in this; dehe--body;
deha-bhrtam--of the embodied; vara--the Supreme.

TRANSLATION

Physical nature is known to be endlessly mutable. The universe is the
cosmic form of the Supreme Lord, and I am that Lord represented as the
Supersoul, dwelling in the heart of every embodied being.

PURPORT

The physical nature is constantly changing. Material bodies generally
pass through six stages: they are born, they grow, they remain for some
duration, they produce some by-products, they dwindle, and then they
vanish. This physical nature is called adhibhuta. Because it is created
at a certain point and will be annihilated at a certain point, the
conception of the universal form of the Supreme Lord that includes all
demigods and their different planets is called adhidaivata. The
individual soul (jiva) accompanies the body. The Supersoul, a plenary
representation of Lord Krsna, is called the Paramatma or adhiyajna and
is situated in the heart. The word eva is particularly important in the
context of this verse because by this word the Lord stresses that the
Paramatma is not different from Him. The Supersoul, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, seated beside the individual soul, is the
witness of the individual soul's activities and is the source of
consciousness. The Supersoul gives the jiva an opportunity to act
freely, and He witnesses his activities. The functions of all these
different manifestations of the Supreme Lord automatically become
clarified for the pure Krsna conscious devotee engaged in
transcendental service of the Lord. The gigantic universal form of the
Lord called adhidaivata is contemplated by the neophyte who cannot
approach the Supreme Lord in His manifestation as Supersoul. The
neophyte is advised to contemplate the universal form whose legs are
considered the lower planets and whose eyes are considered the sun and
moon, and whose head is considered the upper planetary system.



TEXT 5

anta-kale ca mam eva
smaran muktva kalevaram
yah prayati sa mad-bhavam
yati nasty atra samsayah

SYNONYMS

anta-kale--at the end of life; ca--also; mam--unto Me; eva--certainly;
smaran--remembering; muktva--quitting; kalevaram--the body; yah--he
who; prayati--goes; sah--he; mat-bhavam--My nature; yati--achieves; na-
-not; asti--there is; atra--here; samsayah--doubt.

TRANSLATION

And whoever, at the time of death, quits his body, remembering Me
alone, at once attains My nature. Of this there is no doubt.

PURPORT

In this verse the importance of Krsna consciousness is stressed. Anyone
who quits his body in Krsna consciousness is at once transferred to the
transcendental abode of the Supreme Lord. The word smaran
("remembering") is important. Remembrance of Krsna is not possible for
the impure soul who has not practiced Krsna consciousness in devotional
service. To remember Krsna one should chant the maha-mantra, Hare
Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama
Rama, Hare Hare, incessantly, following in the footsteps of Lord
Caitanya, being more tolerant than a tree, humbler than the grass and
offering all respect to others without requiring respect in return. In
such a way one will be able to depart from the body successfully
remembering Krsna and so attain the supreme goal.

TEXT 6

yam yam vapi smaran bhavam
tyajaty ante kalevaram
tam tam evaiti kaunteya
sada tad-bhava-bhavitah

SYNONYMS

yam yam--whatever; va--either; api--also; smaran--remembering; bhavam--
nature; tyajati--give up; ante--at the end; kalevaram--this body; tam
tam--similar; eva--certainly; eti--gets; kaunteya--O son of Kunti;
sada--always; tat--that; bhava--state of being; bhavitah--remembering.

TRANSLATION

Whatever state of being one remembers when he quits his body, that
state he will attain without fail.

PURPORT

The process of changing one's nature at the critical moment of death is
here explained. How can one die in the proper state of mind? Maharaja



Bharata thought of a deer at the time of death and so was transferred
to that form of life. However, as a deer, Maharaja Bharata could
remember his past activities. Of course the cumulative effect of the
thoughts and actions of one's life influences one's thoughts at the
moment of death; therefore the actions of this life determine one's
future state of being. If one is transcendentally absorbed in Krsna's
service, then his next body will be transcendental (spiritual), not
physical. Therefore the chanting of Hare Krsna is the best process for
successfully changing one's state of being to transcendental life.

TEXT 7

tasmat sarvesu kalesu
mam anusmara yudhya ca
mayy arpita-mano-buddhir
mam evaisyasy asamsayah

SYNONYMS

tasmat--therefore; sarvesu--always; kalesu--time; mam--unto Me;
anusmara--go on remembering; yudhya--fight; ca--also; mayi--unto Me;
arpita--surrender; manah--mind; buddhih--intellect; mam--unto Me; eva--
surely; esyasi--will attain; asamsayah--beyond a doubt.

TRANSLATION

Therefore, Arjuna, you should always think of Me in the form of Krsna
and at the same time carry out your prescribed duty of fighting. With
your activities dedicated to Me and your mind and intelligence fixed on
Me, you will attain Me without doubt.

PURPORT

This instruction to Arjuna is very important for all men engaged in
material activities. The Lord does not say that one should give up his
prescribed duties or engagements. One can continue them and at the same
time think of Krsna by chanting Hare Krsna. This will free one from
material contamination and engage the mind and intelligence in Krsna.
By chanting Krsna's names, one will be transferred to the supreme
planet, Krsnaloka, without a doubt.

TEXT 8

abhyasa-yoga-yuktena
cetasa nanya-gamina
paramam purusam divyam
yati parthanucintayan

SYNONYMS

abhyasa--practice; yoga-yuktena--being engaged in meditation; cetasa--
by the mind and intelligence; na anya-gamina--without their being
deviated; paramam--the Supreme; purusam--Personality of Godhead;
divyam--transcendental; yati--achieves; partha--O son of Prtha;
anucintayan--constantly thinking of.

TRANSLATION



He who meditates on the Supreme Personality of Godhead, his mind
constantly engaged in remembering Me, undeviated from the path, he, O
Partha [Arjuna], is sure to reach Me.

PURPORT

In this verse Lord Krsna stresses the importance of remembering Him.
One's memory of Krsna is revived by chanting the maha-mantra, Hare
Krsna. By this practice of chanting and hearing the sound vibration of
the Supreme Lord, one's ear, tongue and mind are engaged. This mystic
meditation is very easy to practice, and it helps one attain the
Supreme Lord. Purusam means enjoyer. Although living entities belong to
the marginal energy of the Supreme Lord, they are in material
contamination. They think themselves enjoyers, but they are not the
supreme enjoyer. Here it is clearly stated that the supreme enjoyer is
the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His different manifestations and
plenary expansions as Narayana, Vasudeva, etc.
The devotees can constantly think of the object of worship, the Supreme
Lord, in any of His features--Narayana, Krsna, Rama, etc., by chanting
Hare Krsna. This practice will purify him, and at the end of his life,
due to his constant chanting, he will be transferred to the kingdom of
God. Yoga practice is meditation on the Supersoul within; similarly, by
chanting Hare Krsna one fixes his mind always on the Supreme Lord. The
mind is fickle, and therefore it is necessary to engage the mind by
force to think of Krsna. One example often given is that of the
caterpillar that thinks of becoming a butterfly and so is transformed
into a butterfly in the same life. Similarly, if we constantly think of
Krsna, it is certain that at the end of our lives we shall have the
same bodily constitution as Krsna.

TEXT 9

kavim puranam anusasitaram
anor aniyamsam anusmared yah
sarvasya dhataram acintya-rupam
aditya-varnam tamasah parastat

SYNONYMS

kavim--one who knows everything; puranam--the oldest; anusasitaram--the
controller; anoh--of the atom; aniyamsam--smaller than; anusmaret--
always thinking; yah--one who; sarvasya--of everything; dhataram--the
maintainer; acintya--inconceivable; rupam--form; aditya-varnam--
illuminated like the sun; tamasah--of the darkness; parastat--
transcendental.

TRANSLATION

One should meditate upon the Supreme Person as the one who knows
everything, as He who is the oldest, who is the controller, who is
smaller than the smallest, who is the maintainer of everything, who is
beyond all material conception, who is inconceivable, and who is always
a person. He is luminous like the sun and, being transcendental, is
beyond this material nature.

PURPORT



The process of thinking of the Supreme is mentioned in this verse. The
foremost point is that He is not impersonal or void. One cannot
meditate on something impersonal or void. That is very difficult. The
process of thinking of Krsna, however, is very easy and is factually
stated herein. First of all, He is purusa, spiritual, Rama and Krsna,
and is described herein as kavim; that is, He knows past, present and
future and therefore knows everything. He is the oldest personality
because He is the origin of everything; everything is born out of Him.
He is also the supreme controller of the universe, maintainer and
instructor of humanity. He is smaller than the smallest. The living
entity is one ten-thousandth part of the tip of a hair, but the Lord is
so inconceivably small that He enters into the heart of this particle.
Therefore He is called smaller than the smallest. As the Supreme, He
can enter into the atom and into the heart of the smallest and control
him as the Supersoul. Although so small, He is still all-pervading and
is maintaining everything. By Him all these planetary systems are
sustained. We often wonder how these big planets are floating in the
air. It is stated here that the Supreme Lord, by His inconceivable
energy, is sustaining all these big planets and systems of galaxies.
The word acintya (inconceivable) is very significant in this
connection. God's energy is beyond our conception, beyond our thinking
jurisdiction, and is therefore called inconceivable (acintya). Who can
argue this point? He pervades this material world and yet is beyond it.
We cannot even comprehend this material world, which is insignificant
compared to the spiritual world--so how can we comprehend what is
beyond? Acintya means that which is beyond this material world, that
which our argument, logic and philosophical speculation cannot touch,
that which is inconceivable. Therefore intelligent persons, avoiding
useless argument and speculation, should accept what is stated in
scriptures like the Vedas, Gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam and follow the
principles they set down. This will lead one to understanding.

TEXT 10

prayana-kale manasacalena
bhaktya yukto yoga-balena caiva
bhruvor madhye pranam avesya samyak
sa tam param purusam upaiti divyam

SYNONYMS

prayana-kale--at the time of death; manasa--by the mind; acalena--
without being deviated; bhaktya--in full devotion; yuktah--engaged;
yoga-balena--by the power of mystic yoga; ca--also; eva--certainly;
bhruvoh--between the two eyebrows; madhye--in; pranam--the life air;
avesya--establishing; samyak--completely; sah--he; tam--that; param--
transcendental; purusam--Personality of Godhead; upaiti--achieves;
divyam--in the spiritual kingdom.

TRANSLATION

One who, at the time of death, fixes his life air between the eyebrows
and in full devotion engages himself in remembering the Supreme Lord,
will certainly attain to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

PURPORT



In this verse it is clearly stated that at the time of death the mind
must be fixed in devotion on the Supreme Godhead. For those practiced
in yoga, it is recommended that they raise the life force between the
eyebrows, but for a pure devotee who does not practice such yoga, the
mind should always be engaged in Krsna consciousness so that at death
he can remember the Supreme by His grace. This is explained in verse
fourteen.
The particular use of the word yoga-balena is significant in this verse
because without practice of yoga one cannot come to this transcendental
state of being at the time of death. One cannot suddenly remember the
Supreme Lord at death unless he is practiced in some yoga system,
especially the system of bhakti-yoga. Since one's mind at death is very
disturbed, one should practice transcendence through yoga during one's
life.

TEXT 11

yad aksaram veda-vido vadanti
visanti yad yatayo vita-ragah
yad icchanto brahmacaryam caranti
tat te padam sangrahena pravaksye

SYNONYMS

yat--that which; aksaram--inexhaustible; veda-vidah--a person
conversant with the Vedas; vadanti--say; visanti--enters; yat--in
which; yatayah--great sages; vita-ragah--in the renounced order of
life; yat--that which; icchantah--desiring; brahmacaryam--celibacy;
caranti--practices; tat--that; te--unto you; padam--situation;
sangrahena--in summary; pravaksye--I shall explain.

TRANSLATION

Persons learned in the Vedas, who utter omkara and who are great sages
in the renounced order, enter into Brahman. Desiring such perfection,
one practices celibacy. I shall now explain to you this process by
which one may attain salvation.

PURPORT

Lord Krsna explains that Brahman, although one without a second, has
different manifestations and features. For the impersonalists, the
syllable om is identical with Brahman. Krsna here explains the
impersonal Brahman, in which the renounced order of sages enter.
In the Vedic system of knowledge, students, from the very beginning,
are taught to vibrate om and learn of the ultimate impersonal Brahman
by living with the spiritual master in complete celibacy. In this way
they realize two of Brahman's features. This practice is very essential
for the student's advancement in spiritual life, but at the moment such
brahmacari (unmarried celibate) life is not at all possible. The social
construction of the world has changed so much that there is no
possibility of one's practicing celibacy from the beginning of student
life. Throughout the world there are many institutions for different
departments of knowledge, but there is no recognized institution where
students can be educated in the brahmacari principles. Unless one
practices celibacy, advancement in spiritual life is very difficult.
Therefore Lord Caitanya has announced, according to the scriptural
injunctions for this Age of Kali, that no process of realizing the



Supreme is possible except the chanting of the holy name of Lord Krsna:
Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama,
Rama Rama, Hare Hare.

TEXT 12

sarva-dvarani samyamya
mano hrdi nirudhya ca
murdhny adhayatmanah pranam
asthito yoga-dharanam

SYNONYMS

sarva-dvarani--all the doors of the body; samyamya--controlling; manah-
-mind; hrdi--in the heart; nirudhya--confined; ca--also; murdhni--on
the head; adhaya--fixed; atmanah--soul; pranam--the life air; asthitah-
-situated; yoga-dharanam--the yogic situation.

TRANSLATION

The yogic situation is that of detachment from all sensual engagements.
Closing all the doors of the senses and fixing the mind on the heart
and the life air at the top of the head, one establishes himself in
yoga.

PURPORT

To practice yoga, as suggested here, one first has to close the door of
all sense enjoyment. This practice is called pratyahara, or withdrawing
the senses from the sense objects. The sense organs for acquiring
knowledge, such as the eyes, ears, nose, tongue and touch, should be
fully controlled and should not be allowed to engage in self-
gratification. In this way the mind focuses on the Supersoul in the
heart and the life force is raised to the top of the head. In the Sixth
Chapter this process is described in detail. But as mentioned before,
this practice is not practical in this age. The best process is Krsna
consciousness. If one is always able to fix his mind on Krsna in
devotional service, it is very easy for him to remain in an undisturbed
transcendental trance, or in samadhi.

TEXT 13

om ity ekaksaram brahma
vyaharan mam anusmaran
yah prayati tyajan deham
sa yati paramam gatim

SYNONYMS

om--the combination of letters om (omkara); iti--thus; eka-aksaram--
supreme, indestructible; brahma--absolute; vyaharan--vibrating; mam--Me
(Krsna); anusmaran--remembering; yah--anyone; prayati--leaves; tyajan--
quitting; deham--this body; sah--he; yati--achieves; paramam--supreme;
gatim--destination.

TRANSLATION



After being situated in this yoga practice and vibrating the sacred
syllable om, the supreme combination of letters, if one thinks of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and quits his body, he will certainly
reach the spiritual planets.

PURPORT

It is clearly stated here that om, Brahman, and Lord Krsna are not
different. The impersonal sound of Krsna is om, but the sound Hare
Krsna contains om. It is clearly recommended in this age that if one
quits his body at the end of this life chanting the maha-mantra, Hare
Krsna, he will reach the spiritual planets. Similarly, those who are
devotees of Krsna enter the Krsna planet or Goloka Vrndavana, whereas
the impersonalists remain in the brahmajyoti. The personalists also
enter many innumerable planets in the spiritual sky known as
Vaikunthas.

TEXT 14

ananya-cetah satatam
yo mam smarati nityasah
tasyaham sulabhah partha
nitya-yuktasya yoginah

SYNONYMS

ananya-cetah--without deviation; satatam--always; yah--anyone; mam--Me
(Krsna); smarati--remembers; nityasah--regularly; tasya--to him; aham--
I am; su-labhah--very easy to achieve; partha--O son of Prtha; nitya--
regularly; yuktasya--engaged; yoginah--of the devotee.

TRANSLATION

For one who remembers Me without deviation, I am easy to obtain, O son
of Prtha, because of his constant engagement in devotional service.

PURPORT

In this verse the bhakti-yoga of the unalloyed devotees of the Supreme
Godhead is described. The proceeding verses mention four different
kinds of devotees--the distressed, the inquisitive, those who seek
material gain, and the speculative philosophers. Different processes of
liberation from material entanglement have also been described: karma-
yoga, jnana-yoga, and hatha-yoga. But here bhakti-yoga, without any
mixture of these, is mentioned. In bhakti-yoga the devotees desire
nothing but Krsna. The pure bhakti devotee does not desire promotion to
heavenly planets, nor does he seek salvation or liberation from
material entanglement. A pure devotee does not desire anything. In the
Caitanya-caritamrta the pure devotee is called niskama, which means he
has no desire for self-interest. Perfect peace belongs to him alone,
not to those who strive for personal gain. The pure devotee only wants
to please the Supreme Lord, and so the Lord says that for anyone who is
unflinchingly devoted to Him, He is easy to attain. The devotee can
render service to any of the transcendental forms of the Supreme Lord,
and he meets with none of the problems that plague the practitioners of
other yogas. Bhakti-yoga is very simple and pure and easy to perform.
One can begin simply by chanting Hare Krsna. Krsna is very merciful to
those who engage in His service, and He helps in various ways that



devotee who has fully surrendered to Him so that he can understand Him
as He is. The Lord gives such a devotee sufficient intelligence so that
ultimately the devotee can attain Him in His spiritual kingdom.
The special qualification of the pure devotee is that he is always
thinking of Krsna without considering the time or place. There should
be no impediments. He should be able to carry out his service anywhere
and at any time. Some say that the devotee should remain in holy places
like Vrndavana or some holy town where the Lord lived, but a pure
devotee can live anywhere and create the atmosphere of Vrndavana by his
devotional service. It was Sri Advaita who told Lord Caitanya,
"Wherever You are, O Lord--there is Vrndavana."
A pure devotee constantly remembers Krsna and meditates upon Him. These
are qualifications of the pure devotee for whom the Lord is most easily
attainable. Bhakti-yoga is the system that the Gita recommends above
all others. Generally, the bhakti-yogis are engaged in five different
ways: 1) santa-bhakta, engaged in devotional service in neutrality; 2)
dasya-bhakta, engaged in devotional service as servant; 3) sakhya-
bhakta, engaged as friend; 4) vatsalya-bhakta, engaged as parent; and
5) madhurya-bhakta, engaged as conjugal lover of the Supreme Lord. In
any of these ways, the pure devotee is always constantly engaged in the
transcendental loving service of the Supreme Lord and cannot forget the
Supreme Lord, and so for him the Lord is easily attained. A pure
devotee cannot forget the Supreme Lord for a moment, and similarly, the
Supreme Lord cannot forget His pure devotee for a moment. This is the
great blessing of the Krsna conscious process of chanting the maha-
mantra--Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare
Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.

TEXT 15

mam upetya punar janma
duhkhalayam asasvatam
napnuvanti mahatmanah
samsiddhim paramam gatah

SYNONYMS

mam--unto Me; upetya--achieving; punah--again; janma--birth; duhkha-
alayam--a place of miseries; asasvatam--temporary; na--never;
apnuvanti--attain; maha-atmanah--the great souls; samsiddhim--
perfection; paramam--ultimate; gatah--achieved.

TRANSLATION

After attaining Me, the great souls, who are yogis in devotion, never
return to this temporary world, which is full of miseries, because they
have attained the highest perfection.

PURPORT

Since this temporary material world is full of the miseries of birth,
old age, disease and death, naturally he who achieves the highest
perfection and attains the supreme planet, Krsnaloka, Goloka Vrndavana,
does not wish to return. The supreme planet is described in Vedic
literature as beyond our material vision, and it is considered the
highest goal. The mahatmas (great souls) receive transcendental
messages from the realized devotees and thus gradually develop
devotional service in Krsna consciousness and become so absorbed in



transcendental service that they no longer desire elevation to any of
the material planets, nor do they even want to be transferred to any
spiritual planet. They only want Krsna's association and nothing else.
Such great souls in Krsna consciousness attain the highest perfection
of life. In other words, they are the supreme souls.

TEXT 16

abrahma-bhuvanal lokah
punar avartino 'rjuna
mam upetya tu kaunteya
punar janma na vidyate

SYNONYMS

abrahma--up to the Brahmaloka planet; bhuvanat--from the planetary
systems; lokah--planets; punah--again; avartinah--returning; arjuna--O
Arjuna; mam--unto Me; upetya--arriving; tu--but; kaunteya--O son of
Kunti; punah janma--rebirth; na--never; vidyate--takes to.

TRANSLATION

From the highest planet in the material world down to the lowest, all
are places of misery wherein repeated birth and death take place. But
one who attains to My abode, O son of Kunti, never takes birth again.

PURPORT

All kinds of yogis--karma, jnana, hatha, etc.--eventually have to
attain devotional perfection in bhakti-yoga, or Krsna consciousness,
before they can go to Krsna's transcendental abode and never return.
Those who attain the highest material planets or the planets of the
demigods are again subjected to repeated birth and death. As persons on
earth are elevated to higher planets, people in higher planets such as
Brahmaloka, Candraloka and Indraloka fall down to earth. The practice
of sacrifice called pancagni-vidya, recommended in the Katha Upanisad,
enables one to achieve Brahmaloka, but if, in Brahmaloka, one does not
cultivate Krsna consciousness, then he must return to earth. Those who
progress in Krsna consciousness in the higher planets are gradually
elevated to higher and higher planets and at the time of universal
devastation are transferred to the eternal spiritual kingdom. When
there is devastation of this material universe, Brahma and his
devotees, who are constantly engaged in Krsna consciousness, are all
transferred to the spiritual universe and to specific spiritual planets
according to their desires.

TEXT 17

sahasra-yuga-paryantam
ahar yad brahmano viduh
ratrim yuga-sahasrantam
te 'ho-ratra-vido janah

SYNONYMS

sahasra--thousand; yuga--millenniums; paryantam--including; ahah--day;
yat--that; brahmanah--of Brahma; viduh--they know; ratrim--night; yuga-



-millenniums; sahasra-antam--similarly, at the end of one thousand; te-
-that; ahah-ratra--day and night; vidah--understand; janah--people.

TRANSLATION

By human calculation, a thousand ages taken together is the duration of
Brahma's one day. And such also is the duration of his night.

PURPORT

The duration of the material universe is limited. It is manifested in
cycles of kalpas. A kalpa is a day of Brahma, and one day of Brahma
consists of a thousand cycles of four yugas or ages: Satya, Treta,
Dvapara and Kali. The cycle of Satya is characterized by virtue, wisdom
and religion, there being practically no ignorance and vice, and the
yuga lasts 1,728,000 years. In the Treta-yuga vice is introduced, and
this yuga lasts 1,296,000 years. In the Dvapara-yuga there is an even
greater decline in virtue and religion, vice increasing, and this yuga
lasts 864,000 years. And finally in Kali-yuga (the yuga that we have
now been experiencing over the past 5,000 years) there is an abundance
of strife, ignorance, irreligion and vice, true virtue being
practically nonexistent, and this yuga lasts 432,000 years. In Kali-
yuga vice increases to such a point that at the termination of the yuga
the Supreme Lord Himself appears as the Kalki avatara, vanquishes the
demons, saves His devotees, and commences another Satya-yuga. Then the
process is set rolling again. These four yugas, rotating a thousand
times, comprise one day of Brahma, the creator god, and the same number
comprise one night. Brahma lives one hundred of such "years" and then
dies. These "hundred years" by earth calculations total to 311 trillion
and 40 billion earth years. By these calculations the life of Brahma
seems fantastic and interminable, but from the viewpoint of eternity it
is as brief as a lightning flash. In the Causal Ocean there are
innumerable Brahmas rising and disappearing like bubbles in the
Atlantic. Brahma and his creation are all part of the material
universe, and therefore they are in constant flux.
In the material universe not even Brahma is free from the process of
birth, old age, disease and death. Brahma, however, is directly engaged
in the service of the Supreme Lord in the management of the universe--
therefore he at once attains liberation. Elevated sannyasis are
promoted to Brahma's particular planet, Brahmaloka, which is the
highest planet in the material universe and which survives all the
heavenly planets in the upper strata of the planetary system, but in
due course Brahma and all the inhabitants of Brahmaloka are subject to
death, according to the law of material nature.

TEXT 18

avyaktad vyaktayah sarvah
prabhavanty ahar-agame
ratry-agame praliyante
tatraivavyakta-samjnake

SYNONYMS

avyaktat--from the unmanifest; vyaktayah--living entities; sarvah--all;
prabhavanti--come into being; ahah-agame--at the beginning of the day;
ratri-agame--at the fall of night; praliyante--are annihilated; tatra--
there; eva--certainly; avyakta--the unmanifest; samjnake--called.



TRANSLATION

When Brahma's day is manifest, this multitude of living entities comes
into being, and at the arrival of Brahma's night they are all
annihilated.

TEXT 19

bhuta-gramah sa evayam
bhutva bhutva praliyate
ratry-agame 'vasah partha
prabhavaty ahar-agame

SYNONYMS

bhuta-gramah--the aggregate of all living entities; sah--they; eva--
certainly; ayam--this; bhutva bhutva--taking birth; praliyate--
annihilate; ratri--night; agame--on arrival; avasah--automatically;
partha--O son of Prtha; prabhavati--manifest; ahah--during daytime;
agame--on arrival.

TRANSLATION

Again and again the day comes, and this host of beings is active; and
again the night falls, O Partha, and they are helplessly dissolved.

PURPORT

The less intelligent jivas, who try to remain within this material
world, are accordingly elevated and degraded in the various planetary
systems. During the daytime of Brahma they exhibit their activities,
and at the coming of Brahma's night they are annihilated. In the day
they receive various bodies for material activities, and at night these
bodies perish. The jivas (individual souls) remain compact in the body
of Visnu and again and again are manifest at the arrival of Brahma's
day. When Brahma's life is finally finished, they are all annihilated
and remain unmanifest for millions and millions of years. When Brahma
is born again in another millennium they are again manifest. In this
way the jivas are captivated by the material world. However, those
intelligent beings who take to Krsna consciousness and chant Hare
Krsna, Hare Rama in devotional service transfer themselves, even in
this life, to the spiritual planet of Krsna and become eternally
blissful there, not being subject to such rebirths.

TEXT 20

paras tasmat tu bhavo 'nyo
'vyakto 'vyaktat sanatanah
yah sa sarvesu bhutesu
nasyatsu na vinasyati

SYNONYMS

parah--transcendental; tasmat--from that; tu--but; bhavah--nature;
anyah--another; avyaktah--unmanifest; avyaktat--from the unmanifest;
sanatanah--eternal; yah--that;  sah--which; sarvesu--all; bhutesu--



manifestation; nasyatsu--being annihilated; na--never; vinasyati--
annihilated.

TRANSLATION

Yet there is another nature, which is eternal and is transcendental to
this manifested and unmanifested matter. It is supreme and is never
annihilated. When all in this world is annihilated, that part remains
as it is.

PURPORT

Krsna's superior spiritual energy is transcendental and eternal. It is
beyond all the changes of material nature, which is manifest and
annihilated during the days and nights of Brahma. Krsna's superior
energy is completely opposite in quality to material nature. Superior
and inferior nature are explained in the Seventh Chapter.

TEXT 21

avyakto 'ksara ity uktas
tam ahuh paramam gatim
yam prapya na nivartante
tad dhama paramam mama

SYNONYMS

avyaktah--unmanifested; aksarah--infallible; iti--thus; uktah--said;
tam--that which; ahuh--is known; paramam--ultimate; gatim--destination;
yam--that which; prapya--gaining; na--never; nivartante--comes back;
tat dhama--that abode; paramam--supreme; mama--Mine.

TRANSLATION

That supreme abode is called unmanifested and infallible, and it is the
supreme destination. When one goes there, he never comes back. That is
My supreme abode.

PURPORT

The supreme abode of the Personality of Godhead, Krsna, is described in
the Brahma-samhita as cintamani-dhama, a place where all desires are
fulfilled. The supreme abode of Lord Krsna known as Goloka Vrndavana is
full of palaces made of touchstone. There are also trees which are
called "desire trees," that supply any type of eatable upon demand, and
there are cows known as surabhi cows which supply a limitless supply of
milk. In this abode, the Lord is served by hundreds of thousands of
goddesses of fortune (Laksmis), and He is called Govinda, the primal
Lord and the cause of all causes. The Lord is accustomed to blow His
flute (venum kvanantam). His transcendental form is the most attractive
in all the worlds--His eyes are like the lotus petals and the color of
His body is like clouds. He is so attractive that His beauty excels
that of thousands of Cupids. He wears saffron cloth, a garland around
His neck and a peacock feather in His hair. In the Gita Lord Krsna
gives only a small hint of His personal abode (Goloka Vrndavana) which
is the supermost planet in the spiritual kingdom. A vivid description
is given in the Brahma-samhita. Vedic literature (Katha Upanisad
1.3.11) states that there is nothing superior to the abode of the



Supreme Godhead, and that that abode is the ultimate destination
(purusan na param kincit sa kastha parama gatih). When one attains to
it, he never returns to the material world. Krsna's supreme abode and
Krsna Himself are nondifferent, being of the same quality. On this
earth, Vrndavana, ninety miles southeast of Delhi, is a replica of that
supreme Goloka Vrndavana located in the spiritual sky. When Krsna
descended on this earth He sported on that particular tract of land
known as Vrndavana in the district of Mathura, India.

TEXT 22

purusah sa parah partha
bhaktya labhyas tv ananyaya
yasyantah-sthani bhutani
yena sarvam idam tatam

SYNONYMS

purusah--the Supreme Personality; sah--He; parah--the Supreme, than
whom no one is greater; partha--O son of Prtha; bhaktya--by devotional
service; labhyah--can be achieved; tu--but; ananyaya--unalloyed,
undeviating devotion; yasya--whom; antah-sthani--within; bhutani--all
of this material manifestation; yena--by whom; sarvam--all; idam--
whatever we can see; tatam--distributed.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is greater than all, is
attainable by unalloyed devotion. Although He is present in His abode,
He is all-pervading, and everything is situated within Him.

PURPORT

It is here clearly stated that the supreme destination from which there
is no return is the abode of Krsna, the Supreme Person. The Brahma-
samhita describes this supreme abode as ananda-cinmaya-rasa, a place
where everything is full of spiritual bliss. Whatever variegatedness is
manifest there is all of the quality of spiritual bliss--there is
nothing material. All variegatedness is expanded as the spiritual
expansion of the Supreme Godhead Himself, for the manifestation there
is totally of the spiritual energy, as explained in Chapter Seven. As
far as this material world is concerned, although the Lord is always in
His supreme abode, He is nonetheless all-pervading by His material
energy. So by His spiritual and material energies He is present
everywhere--both in the material and in the spiritual universes.
Yasyantah-sthani means that everything is sustained by Him, whether it
be spiritual or material energy.
It is clearly stated here that only by bhakti, or devotional service,
can one enter into the Vaikuntha (spiritual) planetary system. In all
the Vaikunthas there is only one Supreme Godhead, Krsna, who has
expanded Himself into millions and millions of plenary expansions.
These plenary expansions are four-armed, and They preside over the
innumerable spiritual planets. They are known by a variety of names--
Purusottama, Trivikrama, Kesava, Madhava, Aniruddha, Hrsikesa,
Sankarsana, Pradyumna, Sridhara, Vasudeva, Damodara, Janardana,
Narayana, Vamana, Padmanabha, etc. These plenary expansions are likened
unto the leaves of a tree, and the main tree is likened to Krsna.
Krsna, dwelling in Goloka Vrndavana, His supreme abode, systematically



conducts all affairs of both universes (material and spiritual) without
a flaw by power of His all-pervasiveness.

TEXT 23

yatra kale tv anavrttim
avrttim caiva yoginah
prayata yanti tam kalam
vaksyami bharatarsabha

SYNONYMS

yatra--in that; kale--time; tu--but; anavrttim--no return; avrttim--
return; ca--also; eva--certainly; yoginah--of different kinds of
mystics; prayatah--one who goes; yanti--departs; tam--that; kalam--
time; vaksyami--describing; bharatarsabha--O best of the Bharatas.

TRANSLATION

O best of the Bharatas, I shall now explain to you the different times
at which, passing away from this world, one does or does not come back.

PURPORT

The unalloyed devotees of the Supreme Lord who are totally surrendered
souls do not care when they leave their bodies or by what method. They
leave everything in Krsna's hands and so easily and happily return to
Godhead. But those who are not unalloyed devotees and who depend
instead on such methods of spiritual realization as karma-yoga, jnana-
yoga, hatha-yoga, etc., must leave the body at a suitable time and
thereby be assured whether or not they will return to the world of
birth and death.
If the yogi is perfect, he can select the time and place for leaving
this material world, but if he is not so perfect, then he has to leave
at nature's will. The most suitable time to leave the body and not
return is being explained by the Lord in these verses. According to
Acarya Baladeva Vidyabhusana, the Sanskrit word kala used herein refers
to the presiding deity of time.

TEXT 24

agnir jyotir ahah suklah
san-masa uttarayanam
tatra prayata gacchanti
brahma brahma-vido janah

SYNONYMS

agnih--fire; jyotih--light; ahah--day; suklah--white; sat-masah--six
months; uttara-ayanam--when the sun passes on the northern side; tatra-
-there; prayatah--one who goes; gacchanti--passes away; brahma--to the
Absolute; brahma-vidah--one who knows the Absolute; janah--person.

TRANSLATION

Those who know the Supreme Brahman pass away from the world during the
influence of the fiery god, in the light, at an auspicious moment,



during the fortnight of the moon and the six months when the sun
travels in the north.

PURPORT

When fire, light, day and moon are as mentioned, it is to be understood
that over all of them there are various presiding deities who make
arrangements for the passage of the soul. At the time of death, the
jiva sets forth on the path to a new life. If one leaves the body at
the time designated above, either accidentally or by arrangement, it is
possible for him to attain the impersonal brahmajyoti. Mystics who are
advanced in yoga practice can arrange the time and place to leave the
body. Others have no control--if by accident they leave at an
auspicious moment, then they will not return to the cycle of birth and
death, but if not, then there is every possibility that they will have
to return. However, for the pure devotee in Krsna consciousness, there
is no fear of returning, whether he leaves the body at an auspicious or
inauspicious moment, by accident or arrangement.

TEXT 25

dhumo ratris tatha krsnah
san-masa daksinayanam
tatra candramasam jyotir
yogi prapya nivartate

SYNONYMS

dhumah--smoke; ratrih--night; tatha--also; krsnah--the fortnight of the
dark moon; sat-masah--the six months; daksina-ayanam--when the sun
passes on the southern side; tatra--there; candra-masam--the moon
planet; jyotih--light; yogi--the mystic; prapya--achieves; nivartate--
comes back.

TRANSLATION

The mystic who passes away from this world during the smoke, the night,
the moonless fortnight, or the six months when the sun passes to the
south, or who reaches the moon planet, again comes back.

PURPORT

In the Third Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam we are informed that those who
are expert in fruitive activities and sacrificial methods on earth
attain to the moon at death. These elevated souls live on the moon for
about 10,000 years (by demigod calculations) and enjoy life by drinking
soma-rasa. They eventually return to earth. This means that on the moon
there are higher classes of living beings, though they may not be
perceived by the gross senses.

TEXT 26

sukla-krsne gati hy ete
jagatah sasvate mate
ekaya yaty anavrttim
anyayavartate punah

SYNONYMS



sukla--light; krsne--darkness; gati--passing away; hi--certainly; ete--
all these; jagatah--of the material world; sasvate--of the Vedas; mate-
-in the opinion; ekaya--by one; yati--goes; anavrttim--no return;
anyaya--by the other; avartate--comes back; punah--again.

TRANSLATION

According to the Vedas, there are two ways of passing from this world--
one in the light and one in darkness. When one passes in light, he does
not come back; but when one passes in darkness, he returns.

PURPORT

The same description of departure and return is quoted by Acarya
Baladeva Vidyabhusana from the Chandogya Upanisad (5.10.3-5). In such a
way, those who are fruitive laborers and philosophical speculators from
time immemorial are constantly going and coming. Actually they do not
attain ultimate salvation, for they do not surrender to Krsna.

TEXT 27

naite srti partha janan
yogi muhyati kascana
tasmat sarvesu kalesu
yoga-yukto bhavarjuna

SYNONYMS

na--never; ete--all these; srti--different paths; partha--O son of
Prtha; janan--even if they know; yogi--the devotees of the Lord;
muhyati--bewildered; kascana--anyone; tasmat--therefore; sarvesu
kalesu--always; yoga-yuktah--being engaged in Krsna consciousness;
bhava--just become; arjuna--O Arjuna.

TRANSLATION

The devotees who know these two paths, O Arjuna, are never bewildered.
Therefore be always fixed in devotion.

PURPORT

Krsna is here advising Arjuna that he should not be disturbed by the
different paths the soul can take when leaving the material world. A
devotee of the Supreme Lord should not worry whether he will depart
either by arrangement or by accident. The devotee should be firmly
established in Krsna consciousness and chant Hare Krsna. He should know
that concern over either of these two paths is troublesome. The best
way to be absorbed in Krsna consciousness is to be always dovetailed in
His service, and that will make one's path to the spiritual kingdom
safe, certain, and direct. The word yoga-yukta is especially
significant in this verse. One who is firm in yoga is constantly
engaged in Krsna consciousness in all his activities. Sri Rupa Gosvami
advises that one should be unattached in the material world and that
all affairs should be steeped in Krsna consciousness. In this way one
attains perfection. Therefore the devotee is not disturbed by these
descriptions because he knows that his passage to the supreme abode is
guaranteed by devotional service.



TEXT 28

vedesu yajnesu tapahsu caiva
danesu yat punya-phalam pradistam
atyeti tat sarvam idam viditva
yogi param sthanam upaiti cadyam

SYNONYMS

vedesu--in the study of the Vedas; yajnesu--in the performances of
yajna, sacrifice; tapahsu--undergoing different types of austerities;
ca--also; eva--certainly; danesu--in giving charities; yat--that which;
punya-phalam--the result of pious work; pradistam--directed; atyeti--
surpasses; tat--all those;  sarvam idam--all those described above;
viditva--knowing; yogi--the devotee; param--supreme; sthanam--abode;
upaiti--achieved peace; ca--also; adyam--original.

TRANSLATION

A person who accepts the path of devotional service is not bereft of
the results derived from studying the Vedas, performing austere
sacrifices, giving charity or pursuing philosophical and fruitive
activities. At the end he reaches the supreme abode.

PURPORT

This verse is the summation of the Seventh and Eighth chapters,
particularly as the chapters deal with Krsna consciousness and
devotional service. One has to study the Vedas under the guidance of
the spiritual master and undergo many austerities and penances while
living under his care. A brahmacari has to live in the home of the
spiritual master just like a servant, and he must beg alms from door to
door and bring them to the spiritual master. He takes food only under
the master's order, and if the master neglects to call the student for
food that day, the student fasts. These are some of the Vedic
principles for observing brahmacarya.
After the student studies the Vedas under the master for a period from
five to twenty years, he may become a man of perfect character. Study
of the Vedas is not meant for the recreation of armchair speculators,
but for the formation of character. After this training, the brahmacari
is allowed to enter into household life and marry. When he is a
householder, he also has to perform many sacrifices and strive for
further enlightenment. Then after retiring from household life, upon
accepting the order of vanaprastha, he undergoes severe penances, such
as living in forests, dressing with tree bark, not shaving, etc. By
carrying out the orders of brahmacarya, householder, vanaprastha and
finally sannyasa, one becomes elevated to the perfectional stage of
life. Some are then elevated to the heavenly kingdoms, and when they
become even more advanced they are liberated in the spiritual sky,
either in the impersonal brahmajyoti or in the Vaikuntha planets or
Krsnaloka. This is the path outlined by Vedic literatures.
The beauty of Krsna consciousness, however, is that by one stroke, by
engaging in devotional service, one can surpass all rituals of the
different orders of life.
One should try to understand the Seventh and Eighth Chapters of the
Gita not by scholarship or mental speculation, but by hearing them in
association with pure devotees. Chapters Seven through Twelve are the



essence of Gita, if one is fortunate to understand the Gita--especially
these middle six chapters--in the association of devotees, then his
life at once becomes glorified beyond all penances, sacrifices,
charities, speculations, etc. One should hear the Gita from the devotee
because at the beginning of the Fourth Chapter it is stated that the
Gita can only be perfectly understood by devotees. Hearing the Gita
from devotees, not from mental speculators, is called faith. Through
association of devotees, one is placed in devotional service, and by
this service Krsna's activities, form, pastimes, name, etc., become
clear, and all misgivings are dispelled. Then once doubts are removed,
the study of the Gita becomes extremely pleasurable, and one develops a
taste and feeling for Krsna consciousness. In the advanced stage, one
falls completely in love with Krsna, and that is the beginning of the
highest perfectional stage of life which prepares the devotee's
transferral to Krsna's abode in the spiritual sky, Goloka Vrndavana,
where the devotee enters into eternal happiness.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Eighth Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Attaining the Supreme.

Chapter 9
The Most Confidential Knowledge

TEXT 1

sri-bhagavan uvaca
idam tu te guhyatamam
pravaksyamy anasuyave
jnanam vijnana-sahitam
yaj jnatva moksyase 'subhat

SYNONYMS

sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; idam--
this; tu--but; te--unto you; guhya-tamam--the most confidential;
pravaksyami--I am speaking; anasuyave--to the nonenvious; jnanam--
knowledge; vijnana--realized knowledge; sahitam--with; yat--which;
jnatva--knowing; moksyase--be released; asubhat--from this miserable
material existence.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Lord said: My dear Arjuna, because you are never envious of
Me, I shall impart to you this most secret wisdom, knowing which you
shall be relieved of the miseries of material existence.

PURPORT

As a devotee hears more and more about the Supreme Lord, he becomes
enlightened. This hearing process is recommended in the Srimad-
Bhagavatam: "The messages of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are
full of potencies, and these potencies can be realized if topics
regarding the Supreme Godhead are discussed amongst devotees. This
cannot be achieved by the association of mental speculators or academic
scholars, for it is realized knowledge."
The devotees are constantly engaged in the Supreme Lord's service. The
Lord understands the mentality and sincerity of a particular living
entity who is engaged in Krsna consciousness and gives him the



intelligence to understand the science of Krsna in the association of
the devotees. Discussion of Krsna is very potent, and if a fortunate
person has such association and tries to assimilate the knowledge, then
he will surely make advancement toward spiritual realization. Lord
Krsna, in order to encourage Arjuna to higher and higher elevation in
His potent service, describes in this Ninth Chapter matters more
confidential than any He has already disclosed.
The very beginning of Bhagavad-gita, the First Chapter, is more or less
an introduction to the rest of the book; and in the Second and Third
chapters, the spiritual knowledge described is called confidential.
Topics discussed in the Seventh and Eighth chapters are specifically
related to devotional service, and because they bring enlightenment in
Krsna consciousness, they are called more confidential. But the matters
which are described in the Ninth Chapter deal with unalloyed, pure
devotion. Therefore this is called the most confidential. One who is
situated in the most confidential knowledge of Krsna is naturally
transcendental; he therefore has no material pangs, although he is in
the material world. In the Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu it is said that
although one who has a sincere desire to render loving service to the
Supreme Lord is situated in the conditional state of material
existence, he is to be considered liberated. Similarly, we shall find
in the Bhagavad-gita, Tenth Chapter, that anyone who is engaged in that
way is a liberated person.
Now this first verse has specific significance. Knowledge (idam jnanam)
refers to pure devotional service, which consists of nine different
activities: hearing, chanting, remembering, serving, worshiping,
praying, obeying, maintaining friendship and surrendering everything.
By the practice of these nine elements of devotional service one is
elevated to spiritual consciousness, Krsna consciousness. At the time
when one's heart is cleared of the material contamination, one can
understand this science of Krsna. Simply to understand that a living
entity is not material is not sufficient. That may be the beginning of
spiritual realization but one should recognize the difference between
activities of the body and spiritual activities by which one
understands that he is not the body.
In the Seventh Chapter we have already discussed the opulent potency of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, His different energies, the
inferior and superior natures, and all this material manifestation. Now
in Chapters Nine and Ten the glories of the Lord will be delineated.
The Sanskrit word anasuyave in this verse is also very significant.
Generally the commentators, even if they are highly scholarly, are all
envious of Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Even the most
erudite scholars write on Bhagavad-gita very inaccurately. Because they
are envious of Krsna, their commentaries are useless. The commentaries
given by devotees of the Lord are bona fide. No one can explain
Bhagavad-gita, or give perfect knowledge of Krsna if he is envious. One
who criticizes the character of Krsna without knowing Him is a fool. So
such commentaries should be very carefully avoided. For one who
understands that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the pure
and transcendental Personality, these chapters will be very beneficial.

TEXT 2

raja-vidya raja-guhyam
pavitram idam uttamam
pratyaksavagamam dharmyam
su-sukham kartum avyayam



SYNONYMS

raja-vidya--the king of education; raja-guhyam--the king of
confidential knowledge; pavitram--the purest; idam--this; uttamam--
transcendental; pratyaksa--directly experienced; avagamam--understood;
dharmyam--the principle of religion; su-sukham--very happy; kartum--to
execute; avyayam--everlasting.

TRANSLATION

This knowledge is the king of education, the most secret of all
secrets. It is the purest knowledge, and because it gives direct
perception of the self by realization, it is the perfection of
religion. It is everlasting, and it is joyfully performed.

PURPORT

This chapter of Bhagavad-gita is called the king of education because
it is the essence of all doctrines and philosophies explained before.
There are seven principal philosophers in India, Gautama, Kanada,
Kapila, Yajnavalkya, Sandilya, Vaisvanara, and, finally, Vyasadeva, the
author of the Vedanta-sutra. So there is no dearth of knowledge in the
field of philosophy or transcendental knowledge. Now the Lord says that
this Ninth Chapter is the king of all such knowledge, the essence of
all knowledge that can be derived from the study of the Vedas and
different kinds of philosophy. It is the most confidential because
confidential or transcendental knowledge involves understanding the
difference between the soul and the body. And the king of all
confidential knowledge culminates in devotional service.
Generally, people are not educated in this confidential knowledge; they
are educated in external knowledge. As far as ordinary education is
concerned, people are involved with so many departments: politics,
sociology, physics, chemistry, mathematics, astronomy, engineering,
etc. There are so many departments of knowledge all over the world and
many huge universities, but there is, unfortunately, no university or
educational institution where the science of the spirit soul is
instructed. Yet the soul is the most important part of this body;
without the presence of the soul, the body has no value. Still people
are placing great stress on the bodily necessities of life, not caring
for the vital soul.
The Bhagavad-gita, especially from the Second Chapter on, stresses the
importance of the soul. In the very beginning, the Lord says that this
body is perishable and that the soul is not perishable. That is a
confidential part of knowledge: simply knowing that the spirit soul is
different from this body and that its nature is immutable,
indestructible and eternal. But that gives no positive information
about the soul. Sometimes people are under the impression that the soul
is different from the body and that when the body is finished, or one
is liberated from the body, the soul remains in a void and becomes
impersonal. But actually that is not the fact. How can the soul, which
is so active within this body, be inactive after being liberated from
the body? It is always active. If it is eternal, then it is eternally
active, and its activities in the spiritual kingdom are the most
confidential part of spiritual knowledge. These activities of the
spirit soul are therefore indicated here as constituting the king of
all knowledge, the most confidential part of all knowledge.



This knowledge is the purest form of all activities, as is explained in
Vedic literature. In the Padma Purana, man's sinful activities have
been analyzed and are shown to be the results of sin after sin. Those
who are engaged in fruitive activities are entangled in different
stages and forms of sinful reactions. For instance, when the seed of a
particular tree is sown, the tree does not appear immediately to grow;
it takes some time. It is first a small, sprouting plant, then it
assumes the form of a tree, then it flowers, bears fruit, and, when it
is complete, the flowers and fruits are enjoyed by persons who have
sown the seed of the tree. Similarly, a man performs a sinful act, and
like a seed it takes time to fructify. There are different stages. The
sinful action may have already stopped within the individual, but the
results or the fruit of that sinful action are still enjoyed. There are
sins which are still in the form of a seed, and there are others which
are already fructified and are giving us fruit, which we are enjoying
as distress and pain
As explained in the twenty-eighth verse of the Seventh Chapter, a
person who has completely ended the reactions of all sinful activities
and who is fully engaged in pious activities, being freed from the
duality of this material world, becomes engaged in devotional service
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. In other words, those who
are actually engaged in the devotional service of the Supreme Lord are
already freed from all reactions. For those who are engaged in the
devotional service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, all sinful
reactions, whether fructified, in the stock, or in the form of a seed,
gradually vanish. Therefore the purifying potency of devotional service
is very strong, and it is called pavitram uttamam, the purest. Uttama
means transcendental. Tamas means this material world or darkness, and
uttama means that which is transcendental to material activities.
Devotional activities are never to be considered material, although
sometimes it appears that devotees are engaged just like ordinary men.
One who can see and is familiar with devotional service, however,  will
know that they are not material activities. They are all spiritual and
devotional, uncontaminated by the material modes of nature.
It is said that the execution of devotional service is so perfect that
one can perceive the results directly. This direct result is actually
perceived, and we have practical experience that any person who is
chanting the holy names of Krsna (Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna,
Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare) in course of
time feels some transcendental pleasure and very quickly becomes
purified of all material contamination. This is actually seen.
Furthermore, if one engages not only in hearing but in trying to
broadcast the message of devotional activities as well, or if he
engages himself in helping the missionary activities of Krsna
consciousness, he gradually feels spiritual progress. This advancement
in spiritual life does not depend on any kind of previous education or
qualification. The method itself is so pure that by simply engaging in
it one becomes pure.
In the Vedanta-sutra (3.2.26) this is also described in the following
words: prakasas ca karmany abhyasat. "Devotional service is so potent
that simply by engaging in the activities of devotional service one
becomes enlightened without a doubt."  Narada, who happened to be the
son of a maidservant, had no education, nor was he born into a high
family. But when his mother was engaged in serving great devotees,
Narada also became engaged, and sometimes, in the absence of his
mother, he would serve the great devotees himself. Narada personally
says, "Once only, by their permission, I took the remnants of their
food, and by so doing all my sins were at once eradicated. Thus being



engaged, I became purified in heart, and at that time the very nature
of the transcendentalist became attractive to me."(Bhag 1.5.25) Narada
tells his disciple Vyasadeva that in a previous life he was engaged as
a boy servant of purified devotees during the four months of their stay
and that he was intimately associating with them. Sometimes those sages
left remnants of food on their dishes, and the boy, who would wash
their dishes, wanted to taste the remnants. So he asked the great
devotees whether he could eat them, and they gave their permission.
Narada then ate those remnants and consequently became freed from all
sinful reactions. As he went on eating, he gradually became as pure-
hearted as the sages, and he gradually developed the same taste. The
great devotees relished the taste of unceasing devotional service of
the Lord, hearing, chanting, etc., and by developing the same taste,
Narada wanted also to hear and chant the glories of the Lord. Thus by
associating with the sages, he developed a great desire for devotional
service. Therefore, he quotes from the Vedanta-sutra (prakasas ca
karmany abhyasat): if one is engaged simply in the acts of devotional
service, everything is revealed to him automatically, and he can
understand. This is called pratyaksa, directly perceived.
Narada was actually a son of a maidservant. He had no opportunity to go
to school. He was simply assisting his mother, and fortunately his
mother rendered some service to the devotees. The child Narada also got
the opportunity and simply by association achieved the highest goal of
all religions, devotional service. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is said
that religious people generally do not know that the highest perfection
of religion is the attainment of the stage of devotional service.
Generally Vedic knowledge is required for understanding the path of
self-realization. But here, although he was not educated in the Vedic
principles, Narada acquired the highest results of Vedic study. This
process is so potent that even without performing the religious process
regularly, one can be raised to the highest perfection. How is this
possible? This is also confirmed in Vedic literature: acaryavan puruso
veda. One who is in association with great acaryas, even if he is not
educated or has not studied the Vedas, can become familiar with all the
knowledge necessary for realization.
The process of devotional service is a very happy one. Why? Devotional
service consists of sravanam kirtanam visnoh, so one can simply hear
the chanting of the glories of the Lord or can attend philosophical
lectures on transcendental knowledge given by authorized acaryas.
Simply by sitting, one can learn; then one can eat the remnants of the
food offered to God, nice palatable dishes. In every state devotional
service is joyful. One can execute devotional service even in the most
poverty-stricken condition. The Lord says, patram puspam phalam: He is
ready to accept from the devotee any kind of offering, never mind what.
Even a leaf, a flower, a bit of fruit, or a little water, which are
available in every part of the world, can be offered by any person,
regardless of social position, and will be accepted if offered with
love. There are many instances in history. Simply by tasting the tulasi
leaves offered to the lotus feet of the Lord, great sages like Sanat-
kumara became great devotees. Therefore the devotional process is very
nice, and it can be executed in a happy mood. God accepts only the love
with which things are offered to Him.
It is said here that this devotional service is eternally existing. It
is not as the Mayavadi philosophers claim. They sometimes take to so-
called devotional service, and as long as they are not liberated they
continue their devotional service, but at the end, when they become
liberated, they "become one with God." Such temporary time-serving
devotional service is not accepted as pure devotional service. Actual



devotional service continues even after liberation. When the devotee
goes to the spiritual planet in the kingdom of God, he is also engaged
there in serving the Supreme Lord. He does not try to become one with
the Supreme Lord.
As it will be seen, actual devotional service begins after liberation.
So in Bhagavad-gita it is said, brahma-bhuta, After being liberated, or
being situated in the Brahman position, one's devotional service
begins. By executing devotional service, one can understand the Supreme
Lord. No one can understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead by
executing karma-yoga, jnana or astanga-yoga or any other yoga
independently. Without coming to the stage of devotional service, one
cannot understand what is the Personality of Godhead. In the Srimad-
Bhagavatam it is also confirmed that when one becomes purified by
executing the process of devotional service, especially by hearing
Srimad-Bhagavatam or Bhagavad-gita from realized souls, then he can
understand the science of Krsna, or the science of God. Evam prasanna-
manaso bhagavad-bhakti yogatah. When one's heart is cleared of all
nonsense, then one can understand what God is. Thus the process of
devotional service, of Krsna consciousness, is the king of all
education and the king of all confidential knowledge. It is the purest
form of religion, and it can be executed joyfully without difficulty.
Therefore one should adopt it.

TEXT 3

asraddadhanah purusa
dharmasyasya parantapa
aprapya mam nivartante
mrtyu-samsara-vartmani

SYNONYMS

asraddadhanah--those who are faithless; purusah--such persons;
dharmasya--of this process of religion; asya--of it; parantapa--O
killer of the enemies; aprapya--without obtaining; mam--Me; nivartante-
-come back; mrtyu--death; samsara--material existence; vartmani--on the
path of.

TRANSLATION

Those who are not faithful on the path of devotional service cannot
attain Me, O conqueror of foes, but return to birth and death in this
material world.

PURPORT

The faithless cannot accomplish this process of devotional service;
that is the purport of this verse. Faith is created by association with
devotees. Unfortunate people, even after hearing all the evidence of
Vedic literature from great personalities, still have no faith in God.
They are hesitant and cannot stay fixed in the devotional service of
the Lord. Thus faith is a most important factor for progress in Krsna
consciousness. In the Caitanya-caritamrta it is said that one should
have complete conviction that simply by serving the Supreme Lord Sri
Krsna he can achieve all perfection. That is called real faith. In the
Srimad-Bhagavatam (4.31.14) it is stated that by giving water to the
root of a tree, its branches, twigs and leaves become satisfied, and by
supplying food to the stomach all the senses of the body become



satisfied, and, similarly, by engaging in the transcendental service of
the Supreme Lord, all the demigods and all the living entities
automatically become satisfied.
There are three divisions of Krsna conscious men. In the third class
are those who have no faith. If they are engaged in devotional service
officially, for some ulterior purpose, they cannot achieve the highest
perfectional stage. Most probably they will slip, after some time. They
may become engaged, but because they haven't complete conviction and
faith, it is very difficult for them to continue in Krsna
consciousness. We have practical experience in discharging our
missionary activity that some people come and apply themselves to Krsna
consciousness with some hidden motive, and as soon as they are
economically a little well situated they give up this process and take
to their old ways again. It is only by faith that one can advance in
Krsna consciousness. As far as the development of faith is concerned,
one who is well versed in the literatures of devotional service and has
attained the stage of firm faith is called a first-class person in
Krsna consciousness. And in the second-class are those who are not very
advanced in understanding the devotional scriptures but who
automatically have firm faith that krsna-bhakti or service to Krsna is
the best course and so in good faith have taken it up. Thus they are
superior to the third-class who have neither perfect knowledge of the
scriptures nor good faith but by association and simplicity are trying
to follow. The third-class person in Krsna consciousness may fall down,
but when one is in the second-class or first-class he does not fall
down. One in the first-class will surely make progress and achieve the
result at the end. As far as the third-class person in Krsna
consciousness is concerned, although he has faith in the conviction
that devotional service to Krsna is very good, he has no knowledge of
Krsna through the scriptures like Srimad-Bhagavatam and Bhagavad-gita.
Sometimes these third-class persons in Krsna consciousness have some
tendency toward karma-yoga and jnana-yoga, and sometimes they are
disturbed, but as soon as the infection of karma-yoga or jnana-yoga is
vanquished, they become second-class or first-class persons in Krsna
consciousness. Faith in Krsna is also divided into three stages and
described in Srimad-Bhagavatam. First-class attachment, second-class
attachment, and third-class attachment are also explained in Srimad-
Bhagavatam in the Eleventh Canto. Those who have no faith even after
hearing about Krsna and the excellence of devotional service, who think
that it is simply eulogy, find the path very difficult, even if they
are supposedly engaged in devotional service. For them there is very
little hope in gaining perfection. Thus faith is very important in the
discharge of devotional service.

TEXT 4

maya tatam idam sarvam
jagad avyakta-murtina
mat-sthani sarva-bhutani
na caham tesv avasthitah

SYNONYMS

maya--by Me; tatam--spread; idam--all these manifestations; sarvam--
all; jagat--cosmic manifestation; avyakta-murtina--unmanifested form;
mat-sthani--unto Me; sarva-bhutani--all living entities; na--not; ca--
also; aham--I; tesu--in them; avasthitah--situated.



TRANSLATION

By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded. All
beings are in Me, but I am not in them.

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead is not perceivable through the gross
material senses. It is said that Lord Sri Krsna's name, fame, pastimes,
etc., cannot be understood by material senses. Only to one who is
engaged in pure devotional service under proper guidance is He
revealed. In the Brahma-samhita (5.38) it is stated, premanjana-
cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santah sadaiva hrdayesu vilokayanti: one can
see the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda, always within himself
and outside himself if he has developed the transcendental loving
attitude towards Him. Thus for people in general He is not visible.
Here it is said that although He is all-pervading, everywhere present,
He is yet not conceivable by the material senses. But actually,
although we cannot see Him, everything is resting in Him. As we have
discussed in the Seventh Chapter, the entire material cosmic
manifestation is only a combination of His two different energies, the
superior spiritual energy and the inferior material energy. Just as the
sunshine is spread all over the universe, the energy of the Lord is
spread all over the creation, and everything is resting in that energy.
Yet one should not conclude that because He is spread all over He has
lost His personal existence. To refute such an argument the Lord says,
"I am everywhere, and everything is in Me, but still I am aloof." For
example, a king heads a government which is but the manifestation of
the king's energy; the different governmental departments are nothing
but the energies of the king, and each department is resting on the
king's power. But still one cannot expect the king to be present in
every department personally. That is a crude example. Similarly, all
the manifestations that we see, and everything that exists both in this
material world and in the spiritual world, are resting on the energy of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The creation takes place by the
diffusion of His different energies, and, as it is stated in the
Bhagavad-gita, He is everywhere present by His personal representation,
the diffusion of His different energies.

TEXT 5

na ca mat-sthani bhutani
pasya me yogam aisvaram
bhuta-bhrn na ca bhuta-stho
mamatma bhuta-bhavanah

SYNONYMS

na--never; ca--also; mat-sthani--situated in Me; bhutani--all creation;
pasya--just see; me--My; yogam aisvaram--inconceivable mystic power;
bhuta-bhrt--maintainer of all living entities; na--never; ca--also;
bhuta-sthah--in the cosmic manifestation; mama--My; atma--Self; bhuta-
bhavanah--is the source of all manifestations.

TRANSLATION

And yet everything that is created does not rest in Me. Behold My
mystic opulence! Although I am the maintainer of all living entities,



and although I am everywhere, still My Self is the very source of
creation.

PURPORT

The Lord says that everything is resting on Him. This should not be
misunderstood. The Lord is not directly concerned with the maintenance
and sustenance of this material manifestation. Sometimes we see a
picture of Atlas holding the globe on his shoulders; he seems to be
very tired, holding this great earthly planet. Such an image should not
be entertained in connection with Krsna's upholding this created
universe. He says that although everything is resting on Him, still He
is aloof. The planetary systems are floating in space, and this space
is the energy of the Supreme Lord. But He is different from space. He
is differently situated. Therefore the Lord says, "Although they are
situated on My inconceivable energy, still, as the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, I am aloof from them." This is the inconceivable opulence
of the Lord.
In the Vedic dictionary it is said, "The Supreme Lord is performing
inconceivably wonderful pastimes, displaying His energy. His person is
full of different potent energies, and His determination is itself
actual fact. In this way the Personality of Godhead is to be
understood." We may think to doing something, but there are so many
impediments, and sometimes it is not possible to do as we like. But
when Krsna wants to do something, simply by His willing, everything is
performed so perfectly that one cannot imagine how it is being done.
The Lord explains this fact: although He is the maintainer and
sustainer of the entire material manifestation, He does not touch this
material manifestation. Simply by His supreme will everything is
created, everything is sustained, everything is maintained, and
everything is annihilated. There is no difference between His mind and
Himself (as there is a difference between ourselves and our present
material mind) because He is absolute spirit. Simultaneously the Lord
is present in everything; yet the common man cannot understand how He
is also present personally. He is different from this material
manifestation, yet everything is resting on Him. This is explained here
as yogam aisvaram, the mystic power of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.

TEXT 6

yathakasa-sthito nityam
vayuh sarvatra-go mahan
tatha sarvani bhutani
mat-sthanity upadharaya

SYNONYMS

yatha--as much as; akasa-sthitah--situated in space; nityam--always;
vayuh--wind; sarvatra-gah--blowing everywhere; mahan--great; tatha--
similarly; sarvani--everything; bhutani--created beings; mat-sthani--
situated in Me; iti--thus; upadharaya--try to understand.

TRANSLATION

As the mighty wind, blowing everywhere, always rests in ethereal space,
know that in the same manner all beings rest in Me.



PURPORT

For the ordinary person it is almost inconceivable how the huge
material creation is resting in Him. But the Lord is giving an example
which may help us to understand. Space is the biggest manifestation we
can conceive. The cosmic manifestation rests in space. Space permits
the movement of even the atoms and on up to the greatest planets, the
Sun and the Moon. Although the sky (or wind or air) is great, still it
is situated within space. Space is not beyond the sky.
In the Upanisads, it is stated, "It is out of the fear of the Supreme
Lord that the wind is blowing." (Taittiriya Upanisad 2.8.1) In the
Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad (3.8.9) it is stated, "By the supreme order,
under the superintendence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
moon, the sun, and other great planets are moving." In the Brahma-
samhita (5.52) this is also stated. There is also a description of the
movement of the sun, and it is said that the sun is considered to be
one of the eyes of the Supreme Lord and that it has immense potency to
diffuse heat and light. Still it is moving in its prescribed orbit by
the order and the supreme will of Govinda. So, from the Vedic
literature we can find evidence that this material manifestation, which
appears to us to be very wonderful and great, is under the complete
control of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This will be further
explained in the later verses of this chapter.

TEXT 7

sarva-bhutani kaunteya
prakrtim yanti mamikam
kalpa-ksaye punas tani
kalpadau visrjamy aham

SYNONYMS

sarva-bhutani--all created entities; kaunteya--O son of Kunti;
prakrtim--nature; yanti--enter; mamikam--unto Me; kalpa-ksaye--at the
end of the millennium; punah--again; tani--all those; kalpa-adau--in
the beginning of the millennium; visrjami--I create; aham--I.

TRANSLATION

O son of Kunti at the end of the millennium every material
manifestation enters into My nature, and at the beginning of another
millennium, by My potency, I again create.

PURPORT

The creation, maintenance and annihilation of this material cosmic
manifestation is completely dependent on the supreme will of the
Personality of Godhead. "At the end of the millennium" means at the
death of Brahma. Brahma lives for one hundred years, and his one day is
calculated at 4,300,000,000 of our earthly years. His night is of the
same duration. His month consists of thirty such days and nights, and
his year of twelve months. After one hundred such years, when Brahma
dies, the devastation or annihilation takes place; this means that the
energy manifested by the Supreme Lord is again wound up in Himself.
Then again, when there is need to manifest the cosmic world, it is done
by His will: "Although I am one, I shall become many." This is the



Vedic aphorism (Chandogya Upanisad 6.2.3). He expands Himself in this
material energy, and the whole cosmic manifestation again takes place.

TEXT 8

prakrtim svam avastabhya
visrjami punah punah
bhuta-gramam imam krtsnam
avasam prakrter vasat

SYNONYMS

prakrtim--material nature; svam--of My personal Self; avastabhya--enter
in; visrjami--create; punah punah--again, again; bhuta-gramam--all
these cosmic manifestations; imam--this; krtsnam--total; avasam--
automatically; prakrteh--by the force of nature; vasat--under
obligation.

TRANSLATION

The whole cosmic order is under Me. By My will it is manifested again
and again, and by My will it is annihilated at the end.

PURPORT

This matter is the manifestation of the inferior energy of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. This has already been explained several times.
At the creation, the material energy is let loose as the mahat-tattva,
into which the Lord as His first Purusa incarnation, Maha-Visnu,
enters. He lies within the Causal Ocean and breathes out innumerable
universes, and into each universe the Lord again enters as
Garbhodakasayi Visnu. Each universe is in that way created. He still
further manifests Himself as Ksirodakasayi Visnu, and that Visnu enters
into everything--even into the minute atom. This fact is explained
here. He enters into everything.
Now, as far as the living entities are concerned, they are impregnated
into this material nature, and as a result of their past deeds they
take different positions. Thus the activities of this material world
begin. The activities of the different species of living beings are
begun from the very moment of the creation. It is not that all is
evolved. The different species of life are created immediately along
with the universe. Men, animals, beasts, birds--everything is
simultaneously created, because whatever desires the living entities
had at the last annihilation are again manifested. It is clearly stated
here that the living entities have nothing to do with this process. The
state of being in their past life in the past creation is simply
manifested again, and all this is done simply by His will. This is the
inconceivable potency of the Supreme Personality of God. And after
creating different species of life, He has no connection with them. The
creation takes place to accommodate the inclinations of the various
living entities, and so the Lord does not become involved with it.

TEXT 9

na ca mam tani karmani
nibadhnanti dhananjaya
udasina-vad asinam
asaktam tesu karmasu



SYNONYMS

na--never; ca--also; mam--Me; tani--all those; karmani--activities;
nibadhnanti--bind; dhananjaya--O conqueror of riches; udasina-vat--as
neutral; asinam--situated; asaktam--without attraction; tesu--in them;
karmasu--in activities.

TRANSLATION

O Dhananjaya, all this work cannot bind Me. I am ever detached, seated
as though neutral.

PURPORT

One should not think, in this connection, that the Supreme Personality
of Godhead has no engagement. In His spiritual world He is always
engaged. In the Brahma-samhita (5.6) it is stated, "He is always
involved in His eternal, blissful, spiritual activities, but He has
nothing to do with these material activities." Material activities are
being carried on by His different potencies. The Lord is always neutral
in the material activities of the created world. This neutrality is
explained here. Although He has control over every minute detail of
matter, He is sitting as if neutral. The example can be given of a high
court judge sitting on his bench. By his order so many things are
happening: someone is being hanged, someone is being put into jail,
someone is awarded a huge amount of wealth--but still he is neutral. He
has nothing to do with all that gain and loss. Similarly, the Lord is
always neutral, although He has His hand in every sphere of activity.
In the Vedanta-sutra (2.1.34) it is stated that He is not situated in
the dualities of this material world. He is transcendental to these
dualities. Nor is He attached to the creation and annihilation of this
material world. The living entities take their different forms in the
various species of life according to their past deeds, and the Lord
doesn't interfere with them.

TEXT 10

mayadhyaksena prakrtih
suyate sa-caracaram
hetunanena kaunteya
jagad viparivartate

SYNONYMS

maya--by Me; adhyaksena--by superintendence; prakrtih--material nature;
suyate--manifests; sa--with; cara-acaram--the moving and the nonmoving;
hetuna--for this reason; anena--this; kaunteya--O son of Kunti; jagat--
the cosmic manifestation; viparivartate--is working.

TRANSLATION

This material nature is working under My direction, O son of Kunti, and
it is producing all moving and unmoving beings. By its rule this
manifestation is created and annihilated again and again.

PURPORT



It is clearly stated here that the Supreme Lord, although aloof from
all the activities of the material world, remains the supreme director.
The Supreme Lord is the supreme will and the background of this
material manifestation, but the management is being conducted by
material nature. Krsna also states in Bhagavad-gita that of all of the
living entities in different forms and species, "I am the father." The
father gives seeds to the womb of the mother for the child, and
similarly the Supreme Lord by His mere glance injects all the living
entities into the womb of material nature, and they come out in their
different forms and species, according to their last desires and
activities. All these living entities, although born under the glance
of the Supreme Lord, still take their different bodies according to
their past deeds and desires. So the Lord is not directly attached to
this material creation. He simply glances over material nature;
material nature is thus activated, and everything is created
immediately. Because He glances over material nature, there is
undoubtedly activity on the part of the Supreme Lord, but He has
nothing to do with the manifestation of the material world directly.
This example is given in the smrti: when there is a fragrant flower
before someone, the fragrance is touched by the smelling power of the
person, yet the smelling and the flower are detached from one another.
There is a similar connection between the material world and the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; actually He has nothing to do with this
material world, but He creates by His glance and ordains. In summary,
material nature, without the superintendence of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, cannot do anything. Yet the Supreme Personality is detached
from all material activities.

TEXT 11

avajananti mam mudha
manusim tanum asritam
param bhavam ajananto
mama bhuta-mahesvaram

SYNONYMS

avajananti--deride; mam--Me; mudhah--foolish men; manusim--in human
form; tanum--body; asritam--assuming; param--transcendental; bhavam--
nature; ajanantah--not knowing; mama--Mine; bhuta--everything that be;
maha-isvaram--the supreme proprietor.

TRANSLATION

Fools deride Me when I descend in the human form. They do not know My
transcendental nature and My supreme dominion over all that be.

PURPORT

From the other explanations of the previous verses in this chapter, it
is clear that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, although appearing
like a human being, is not a common man. The Personality of Godhead,
who conducts the creation, maintenance and annihilation of the complete
cosmic manifestation, cannot be a human being. Yet there are many
foolish men who consider Krsna to be merely a powerful man and nothing
more. Actually, He is the original Supreme Personality, as is confirmed
in the Brahma-samhita (isvarah paramah krsnah); He is the Supreme Lord.



There are many isvaras, controllers, and one appears greater than
another. In the ordinary management of affairs in the material world,
we find some official or director, and above him there is a secretary,
and above him a minister, and above him a president. Each of them is a
controller, but one is controlled by another. In the Brahma-samhita it
is said that Krsna is the supreme controller; there are many
controllers undoubtedly, both in the material and spiritual world, but
Krsna is the supreme controller (isvarah paramah krsnah) and His body
is sac-cid-ananda, nonmaterial.
Material bodies cannot perform the wonderful acts described in previous
verses. His body is eternal, blissful and full of knowledge. Although
He is not a common man, the foolish deride Him and consider Him to be a
man. His body is called here manusim because He is acting just like a
man, a friend of Arjuna's, a politician involved in the Battle of
Kuruksetra. In so many ways He is acting just like an ordinary man, but
actually His body is sac-cid-ananda-vigraha--eternal bliss and
knowledge absolute. This is confirmed in the Vedic language also. Sac-
cid-ananda-rupaya krsnaya: "I offer my obeisances unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Krsna, who is the eternal blissful form of
knowledge." (Gopala-tapani Upanisad 1.1) There are other descriptions
in the Vedic language also. Tam ekam govindam: "You are Govinda, the
pleasure of the senses and the cows." Sac-cid-ananda-vigraham: "And
Your form is transcendental, full of knowledge, bliss and eternality."
(Gopala-tapani Upanisad 1.35)
Despite the transcendental qualities of Lord Krsna's body, its full
bliss and knowledge, there are many so-called scholars and commentators
of Bhagavad-gita who deride Krsna as an ordinary man. The scholar may
be born an extraordinary man due to his previous good work, but this
conception of Sri Krsna is due to a poor fund of knowledge. Therefore
he is called mudha, for only foolish persons consider Krsna to be an
ordinary human being because they do not know the confidential
activities of the Supreme Lord and His different energies. They do not
know that Krsna's body is a symbol of complete knowledge and bliss,
that He is the proprietor of everything that be and that He can award
liberation to anyone. Because they do not know that Krsna has so many
transcendental qualifications, they deride Him.
Nor do they know that the appearance of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead in this material world is a manifestation of His internal
energy. He is the master of the material energy. As has been explained
in several places (mama maya duratyaya), He claims that the material
energy, although very powerful, is under His control, and whoever
surrenders unto Him can get out of the control of this material energy.
If a soul surrendered to Krsna can get out of the influence of material
energy, then how can the Supreme Lord, who conducts the creation,
maintenance and annihilation of the whole cosmic nature, have a
material body like us? So this conception of Krsna is complete
foolishness. Foolish persons, however, cannot conceive that the
Personality of Godhead, Krsna, appearing just like an ordinary man, can
be the controller of all the atoms and of the gigantic manifestation of
the universal form. The biggest and the minutest are beyond their
conception, so they cannot imagine that a form like that of a human
being can simultaneously control the infinite and the minute. Actually
although He is controlling the infinite and the finite, He is apart
from all this manifestation. It is clearly stated concerning His yogam
aisvaram, His inconceivable transcendental energy, that He can control
the infinite and the finite simultaneously and that He can remain aloof
from them. Although the foolish cannot imagine how Krsna, who appears
just like a human being, can control the infinite and the finite, those



who are pure devotees accept this, for they know that Krsna is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore they completely surrender
unto Him and engage in Krsna consciousness, devotional service of the
Lord.
There are many controversies amongst the impersonalists and the
personalists about the Lord's appearance as a human being. But if we
consult Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam, the authoritative texts
for understanding the science of Krsna, then we can understand that
Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is not an ordinary man,
although He appeared on this earth as an ordinary human. In the Srimad-
Bhagavatam, First Canto, First Chapter, when the sages inquire about
the activities of Krsna, it is stated that His appearance as a man
bewilders the foolish. No human being could perform the wonderful acts
that Krsna performed while He was present on this earth. When Krsna
appeared before His father and mother, Vasudeva and Devaki, He appeared
with four hands, but after the prayers of the parents, He transformed
Himself into an ordinary child. His appearance as an ordinary human
being is one of the features of His transcendental body. In the
Eleventh Chapter of Bhagavad-gita also it is stated that Arjuna prayed
to see Krsna's form of four hands (tenaiva rupena catur-bhujena).
Arjuna prayed to see again that form of four hands, and when Krsna was
thus petitioned by Arjuna, He again assumed His original form. All
these different features of the Supreme Lord are certainly not those of
an ordinary human being.
Some of those who deride Krsna, who are infected with the Mayavadi,
philosophy quote the following verse from the Srimad-Bhagavatam
(3.29.21) to prove that Krsna is just an ordinary man. Aham sarvesu
bhutesu bhutatmavasthitah sada: "The Supreme is present in every living
entity." We should better take note of this particular verse from the
Vaisnava acaryas like Jiva Gosvami instead of following the
interpretation of unauthorized persons who deride Krsna. Jiva Gosvami,
commenting on this verse, says that Krsna, in His plenary expansion as
Paramatma, is situated in the moving and the nonmoving entities as the
Supersoul, so any neophyte devotee who simply gives his attention to
the arca-murti, the form of the Supreme Lord in the temple, and does
not respect other living entities is uselessly worshiping the form of
the Lord in the temple. There are three kinds of devotees of the Lord,
and the neophyte is in the lowest stage. The neophyte devotee gives
more attention to the Deity in the temple than to other devotees, so
Jiva Gosvami warns that this sort of mentality should be corrected. A
devotee should see that Krsna is present in everyone's heart as
Paramatma; therefore every body is the embodiment of or the temple of
the Supreme Lord, and as such, as one offers respect to the temple of
the Lord, he should similarly properly respect each and every body in
whom the Paramatma dwells. Everyone should therefore be given proper
respect and should not be neglected.
There are also many impersonalists who deride temple worship. They say
that since God is everywhere, why should one restrict himself to temple
worship? But if God is everywhere, is He not in the temple or in the
Deity? Although the personalist and the impersonalist will fight with
one another perpetually, a perfect devotee in Krsna consciousness knows
that although Krsna is the Supreme Personality, He is all-pervading, as
is confirmed in the Brahma-samhita. Although His personal abode is
Goloka Vrndavana and He is always staying there, still, by His
different manifestations of energy and by His plenary expansion, He is
present everywhere in all parts of the material and spiritual
creations.



TEXT 12

moghasa mogha-karmano
mogha-jnana vicetasah
raksasim asurim caiva
prakrtim mohinim sritah

SYNONYMS

mogha-asah--baffled hope; mogha-karmanah--baffled in fruitive
activities; mogha-jnanah--baffled in knowledge; vicetasah--bewildered;
raksasim--demonic; asurim--atheistic; ca--and; eva--certainly;
prakrtim--nature; mohinim--bewildering; sritah--taking shelter of.

TRANSLATION

Those who are thus bewildered are attracted by demonic and atheistic
views. In that deluded condition, their hopes for liberation, their
fruitive activities, and their culture of knowledge are all defeated.

PURPORT

There are many devotees who assume themselves to be in Krsna
consciousness and devotional service but at heart do not accept the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, as the Absolute Truth. For them,
the fruit of devotional service--going back to Godhead--will never be
tasted. Similarly, those who are engaged in fruitive, pious activities
and who are ultimately hoping to be liberated from this material
entanglement will never be successful either because they deride the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. In other words, persons who mock
Krsna are to be understood to be demonic or atheistic. As described in
the Seventh Chapter of Bhagavad-gita, such demonic miscreants never
surrender to Krsna. Therefore their mental speculations to arrive at
the Absolute Truth bring them to the false conclusion that the ordinary
living entity and Krsna are one and the same. With such a false
conviction, they think that the body of any human being is now simply
covered by material nature and that as soon as one is liberated from
this material body there is no difference between God and himself. This
attempt to become one with Krsna will be baffled because of delusion.
Such atheistic and demoniac cultivation of spiritual knowledge is
always futile. That is the indication of this verse. For such persons,
cultivation of the knowledge in the Vedic literature, like the Vedanta-
sutra and the Upanisads, is always baffled.
It is a great offense, therefore, to consider Krsna, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, to be an ordinary man. Those who do so are
certainly deluded because they cannot understand the eternal form of
Krsna. In the Brhad-viasnava mantra it is clearly stated that one who
considers the body of Krsna to be material should be driven out from
all rituals and activities of the sruti. And if one by chance sees his
face, he should at once take bath in the Ganges to rid himself of
infection. People jeer at Krsna because they are envious of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Their destiny is certainly to take birth after
birth in the species of atheistic and demoniac life. Perpetually, their
real knowledge will remain under delusion, and gradually they will
regress to the darkest region of creation.

TEXT 13



mahatmanas tu mam partha
daivim prakrtim asritah
bhajanty ananya-manaso
jnatva bhutadim avyayam

SYNONYMS

maha-atmanah--the great souls; tu--but; mam--unto Me; partha--O son of
Prtha; daivim--divine; prakrtim--nature; asritah--taken shelter of;
bhajanti--render service; ananya-manasah--without deviation of the
mind; jnatva--knowing; bhuta--creation; adim--original; avyayam--
inexhaustible.

TRANSLATION

O son of Prtha, those who are not deluded, the great souls, are under
the protection of the divine nature. They are fully engaged in
devotional service because they know Me as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, original and inexhaustible.

PURPORT

In this verse the description of mahatma is clearly given. The first
sign of the mahatma is that he is already situated in the divine
nature. He is not under the control of material nature. And how is this
effected? That is explained in the Seventh Chapter: one who surrenders
unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, at once becomes
freed from the control of material nature. That is the qualification.
One can become free from the control of material nature as soon as he
surrenders his soul to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is the
preliminary formula. Being marginal potency, as soon as the living
entity is freed from the control of material nature, he is put under
the guidance of the spiritual nature. The guidance of the spiritual
nature is called daivi prakrti, divine nature. So when one is promoted
in that way--by surrendering to the Supreme Personality of Godhead--one
attains to the stage of great soul, mahatma.
The mahatma does not divert his attention to anything outside Krsna
because he knows perfectly well that Krsna is the original Supreme
Person, the cause of all causes. There is no doubt about it. Such a
mahatma, or great soul, develops through association with other
mahatmas, pure devotees. Pure devotees are not even attracted by
Krsna's other features, such as the four-armed Maha-Visnu. They are
simply attracted by the two-armed form of Krsna. Since they are not
attracted to other features of Krsna (what to speak of the demigods),
they are mot concerned with any form of a demigod or of a human being.
They only meditate upon Krsna in Krsna consciousness. They are always
engaging in the unswerving service of the Lord in Krsna consciousness.

TEXT 14

satatam kirtayanto mam
yatantas ca drdha-vratah
namasyantas ca mam bhaktya
nitya-yukta upasate

SYNONYMS



satatam--always; kirtayantah--chanting; mam--Me; yatantah ca--fully
endeavoring also; drdha-vratah--with determination; namasyantah ca--
offering obeisances; mam--unto Me; bhaktya--in devotion; nitya-yuktah--
perpetually engaged; upasate--worship.

TRANSLATION

Always chanting My glories, endeavoring with great determination,
bowing down before Me, these great souls perpetually worship Me with
devotion.

PURPORT

The mahatma cannot be manufactured by rubber-stamping an ordinary man.
His symptoms are described here: a mahatma is always engaged in
chanting the glories of the Supreme Lord Krsna, the Personality of
Godhead. He has no other business. He is always engaged in the
glorification of the Lord. In other words, he is not an impersonalist.
When the question of glorification is there, one has to glorify the
Supreme Lord, praising His holy name, His eternal form, His
transcendental qualities and His uncommon pastimes. One has to glorify
all these things; therefore a mahatma is attached to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
One who is attached to the impersonal feature of the Supreme Lord, the
brahmajyoti, is not described as mahatma in the Bhagavad-gita. He is
described in a different way in the next verse. The mahatma is always
engaged in different activities of devotional service, as described in
the Srimad-Bhagavatam, hearing and chanting about Visnu, not a demigod
or human being. That is devotion: sravanam kirtanam visnoh and
smaranam, remembering Him. Such a mahatma has firm determination to
achieve at the ultimate end the association of the Supreme Lord in any
one of the five transcendental rasas. To achieve that success, he
engages all activities--mental, bodily and vocal, everything--in the
service of the Supreme Lord, Sri Krsna. That is called full Krsna
consciousness.
In devotional service there are certain activities which are called
determined, such as fasting on certain days, like the eleventh day of
the moon, Ekadasi, and on the appearance day of the Lord, etc. All
these rules and regulations are offered by the great acaryas for those
who are actually interested in getting admission into the association
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the transcendental world. The
mahatmas, great souls, strictly observe all these rules and
regulations, and therefore they are sure to achieve the desired result.
As described in the second verse of this chapter, this devotional
service is not only easy, but it can be performed in a happy mood. One
does not need to undergo any severe penance and austerity. He can live
this life in devotional service, guided by an expert spiritual master,
and in any position, either as a householder or a sannyasi or a
brahmacari; in any position and anywhere in the world, he can perform
this devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead and thus
become actually mahatma, a great soul.

TEXT 15

jnana-yajnena capy anye
yajanto mam upasate
ekatvena prthaktvena
bahudha visvato-mukham



SYNONYMS

jnana-yajnena--by cultivation of knowledge; ca--also; api--certainly;
anye--others; yajantah--worshiping; mam--Me; upasate--worship;
ekatvena--in oneness; prthaktvena--in duality; bahudha--diversity;
visvatah-mukham--in the universal form.

TRANSLATION

Others, who are engaged in the cultivation of knowledge, worship the
Supreme Lord as the one without a second, diverse in many, and in the
universal form.

PURPORT

This verse is the summary of the previous verses. The Lord tells Arjuna
that those who are purely in Krsna consciousness and do not know
anything other than Krsna are called mahatma; yet there are other
persons who are not exactly in the position of mahatma but who worship
Krsna also, in different ways. Some of them are already described as
the distressed, the financially destitute, the inquisitive, and those
who are engaged in the cultivation of knowledge. But there are others
who are still lower, and these are divided into three: 1) he who
worships himself as one with the Supreme Lord, 2) he who concocts some
form of the Supreme Lord and worships that, and 3) he who accepts the
universal form, the visvarupa of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
and worships that. Out of the above three, the lowest, those who
worship themselves as the Supreme Lord, thinking themselves to be
monists, are most predominant. Such people think themselves to be the
Supreme Lord, and in this mentality they worship themselves. This is
also a type of God worship, for they can understand that they are not
the material body but are actually spiritual soul; at least, such a
sense is prominent. Generally the impersonalists worship the Supreme
Lord in this way. The second class includes the worshipers of the
demigods, those who by imagination consider any form to be the form of
the Supreme Lord. And the third class includes those who cannot
conceive of anything beyond the manifestation of this material
universe. They consider the universe to be the supreme organism or
entity and worship that. The universe is also a form of the Lord.

TEXT 16
aham kratur aham yajnah
svadhaham aham ausadham
mantro 'ham aham evajyam
aham agnir aham hutam

SYNONYMS

aham--I; kratuh--ritual; aham--I; yajnah--sacrifice; svadha--oblation;
aham--I; aham--I; ausadham--healing herb; mantrah--transcendental
chant; aham--I; aham--I; eva--certainly; ajyam--melted butter; aham--I;
agnih--fire; aham--I; hutam--offering.

TRANSLATION



But it is I who am the ritual, I the sacrifice, the offering to the
ancestors, the healing herb, the transcendental chant. I am the butter
and the fire and the offering.

PURPORT

The sacrifice known as jyotistoma is also Krsna, and He is also the
maha-yajna. The oblations offered to the Pitrloka or the sacrifice
performed to please the Pitrloka, considered as a kind of drug in the
form of clarified butter, is also Krsna. The mantras chanted in this
connection are also Krsna. And many other commodities made with milk
products for offering in the sacrifices are also Krsna. The fire is
also Krsna because fire is one of the five material elements and is
therefore claimed as the separated energy of Krsna. In other words, the
Vedic sacrifices recommended in the karma-kanda division of the Vedas
are in total also Krsna. Or, in other words, those who are engaged in
rendering devotional service unto Krsna are to be understood to have
performed all the sacrifices recommended in the Vedas.

TEXT 17

pitaham asya jagato
mata dhata pitamahah
vedyam pavitram omkara
rk sama yajur eva ca

SYNONYMS

pita--father; aham--I; asya--of this; jagatah--of the universe; mata--
mother; dhata--supporter; pitamahah--grandfather; vedyam--what is to be
known; pavitram--that which purifies; om-kara--the syllable om; rk--the
Rg Veda; sama--the Sama Veda; yajuh--the Yajur Veda; eva--certainly;
ca--and.

TRANSLATION

I am the father of this universe, the mother, the support, and the
grandsire. I am the object of knowledge, the purifier and the syllable
om. I am also the Rg, the Sama, and the Yajur [Vedas].

PURPORT

The entire cosmic manifestations, moving and nonmoving, are manifested
by different activities of Krsna's energy. In the material existence we
create different relationships with different living entities who are
nothing but Krsna's marginal energy, but under the creation of prakrti
some of them appear as our father, mother, grandfather, creator, etc.,
but actually they are parts and parcels of Krsna. As such, these living
entities who appear to be our father, mother, etc., are nothing but
Krsna. In this verse the word dhata means "creator." Not only are our
father and mother parts and parcels of Krsna, but their creator,
grandmother and grandfather, etc., are also Krsna. Actually any living
entity, being part and parcel of Krsna, is Krsna. All the Vedas,
therefore, aim only toward Krsna. Whatever we want to know through the
Vedas is but a progressive step to understanding Krsna. That subject
matter which helps us purify our constitutional position is especially
Krsna. Similarly, the living entity who is inquisitive to understand
all Vedic principles is also part and parcel of Krsna and as such is



also Krsna. In all the Vedic mantras the word om, called pranava, is a
transcendental sound vibration and is also Krsna. And because in all
the hymns of the four Vedas, Sama, Yajur, Rg and Atharva, the pranava
or omkara, is very prominent, it is understood to be Krsna.

TEXT 18

gatir bharta prabhuh saksi
nivasah saranam suhrt
prabhavah pralayah sthanam
nidhanam bijam avyayam

SYNONYMS

gatih--goal; bharta--sustainer; prabhuh--Lord; saksi--witness; nivasah-
-abode; saranam--refuge; su-hrt--most intimate friend; prabhavah--
creation; pralayah--dissolution; sthanam--ground; nidhanam--resting
place; bijam--seed; avyayam--imperishable.

TRANSLATION

I am the goal, the sustainer, the master, the witness, the abode, the
refuge and the most dear friend. I am the creation and the
annihilation, the basis of everything, the resting place and the
eternal seed.

PURPORT

Gati means the destination where we want to go. But the ultimate goal
is Krsna, although people do not know it. One who does not know Krsna
is misled, and his so-called progressive march is either partial or
hallucinatory. There are many who make as their destination different
demigods, and by rigid performance of the strict respective methods
they reach different planets known as Candraloka, Suryaloka, Indraloka,
Maharloka, etc. But all such lokas, or planets, being creations of
Krsna, are simultaneously Krsna and not Krsna. Actually such planets,
being manifestations of Krsna's energy, are also Krsna, but actually
they serve only as a step forward for realization of Krsna. To approach
the different energies of Krsna is to approach Krsna indirectly. One
should directly approach Krsna, for that will save time and energy. For
example, if there is a possibility of going to the top of a building by
the help of an elevator, why should one go by the staircase, step by
step? Everything is resting on Krsna's energy; therefore without
Krsna's shelter nothing can exist. Krsna is the supreme ruler because
everything belongs to Him and everything exists on His energy. Krsna,
being situated in everyone's heart, is the supreme witness. The
residences, countries or planets on which we live are also Krsna. Krsna
is the ultimate goal of shelter, and as such one should take shelter of
Krsna either for protection or for annihilation of his distressed
condition. And whenever we have to take protection, we should know that
our protection must be a living force. Thus Krsna is the supreme living
entity. Since Krsna is the source of our generation, or the supreme
father, no one can be a better friend than Krsna, nor can anyone be a
better well-wisher. Krsna is the original source of creation and the
ultimate rest after annihilation. Krsna is therefore the eternal cause
of all causes.

TEXT 19



tapamy aham aham varsam
nigrhnamy utsrjami ca
amrtam caiva mrtyus ca
sad asac caham arjuna

SYNONYMS

tapami--give heat; aham--I; aham--I; varsam--rain; nigrhnami--withhold;
utsrjami--send forth; ca--and; amrtam--immortality; ca--and; eva--
certainly; mrtyuh--death; ca--and; sat--being; asat--nonbeing; ca--and;
aham--I; arjuna--O Arjuna.

TRANSLATION

O Arjuna, I control heat, the rain and the drought. I am immortality,
and I am also death personified. Both being and nonbeing are in Me.

PURPORT

Krsna, by His different energies, diffuses heat and light through the
agency of electricity and the sun. During summer season it is Krsna who
checks rain from falling from the sky, and then during the rainy season
He gives unceasing torrents of rain. The energy which sustains us by
prolonging the duration of our life is Krsna, and Krsna meets us at the
end as death. By analyzing all these different energies of Krsna, one
can ascertain that for Krsna there is no distinction between matter and
spirit, or, in other words, He is both matter and spirit. In the
advanced stage of Krsna consciousness, one does not therefore make such
distinctions. He sees Krsna only in everything.
Since Krsna is both matter and spirit, the gigantic universal form
comprising all material manifestations is also Krsna, and His pastimes
in Vrndavana as two-handed Syamasundara, playing on a flute, are those
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 20

trai-vidya mam soma-pah puta-papa
yajnair istva svar-gatim prarthayante
te punyam asadya surendra-lokam
asnanti divyan divi deva-bhogan

SYNONYMS

trai-vidyah--the knowers of the three Vedas; mam--unto Me; soma-pah--
drinkers of soma juice; puta--purified; papah--sins; yajnaih--with
sacrifices; istva--after worshiping; svah-gatim--passage to heaven;
prarthayante--pray; te--they; punyam--virtue; asadya--enjoying; sura-
indra--of Indra; lokam--the world; asnanti--enjoy; divyan--celestial;
divi--in heaven; deva-bhogan--pleasures of the gods.

TRANSLATION

Those who study the Vedas and drink the soma juice, seeking the
heavenly planets, worship Me indirectly. They take birth on the planet
of Indra, where they enjoy godly delights.

PURPORT



The word trai-vidyah refers to the three Vedas, Sama, Yajur and Rg. A
brahmana who has studied these three Vedas is called a tri-vedi. Anyone
who is very much attached to knowledge derived from these three Vedas
is respected in society. Unfortunately, there are many great scholars
of the Vedas who do not know the ultimate purport of studying them.
Therefore Krsna herein declares Himself to be the ultimate goal for the
tri-vedis. Actual tri-vedis take shelter under the lotus feet of Krsna
and engage in pure devotional service to satisfy the Lord. Devotional
service begins with the chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra and side by
side trying to understand Krsna in truth. Unfortunately those who are
simply official students of the Vedas become more interested in
offering sacrifices to the different demigods like Indra, Candra, etc.
By such endeavor, the worshipers of different demigods are certainly
purified of the contamination of the lower qualities of nature and are
thereby elevated to the higher planetary systems or heavenly planets
known as Maharloka, Janoloka, Tapoloka, etc. Once situated on those
higher planetary systems, one can satisfy his senses hundreds of
thousands of times better than on this planet.

TEXT 21

te tam bhuktva svarga-lokam visalam
ksine punye martya-lokam visanti
evam trayi-dharmam anuprapanna
gatagatam kama-kama labhante

SYNONYMS

te--they; tam--that; bhuktva--enjoying; svarga-lokam--heaven; visalam--
vast; ksine--being exhausted; punye--merits; martya-lokam--mortal
earth; visanti--fall down; evam--thus; trayi--three Vedas; dharmam--
doctrines; anuprapannah--following; gata-agatam--death and birth; kama-
kamah--desiring sense enjoyments; labhante--attain.

TRANSLATION

When they have thus enjoyed heavenly sense pleasure, they return to
this mortal planet again. Thus, through the Vedic principles, they
achieve only flickering happiness.

PURPORT

One who is promoted to those higher planetary systems enjoys a longer
duration of life and better facilities for sense enjoyment, yet one is
not allowed to stay there forever. One is again sent back to this
earthly planet upon finishing the resultant fruits of pious activities.
He who has not attained perfection of knowledge, as indicated in the
Vedanta-sutra (janmady asya yatah), or, in other words, he who fails to
understand Krsna, the cause of all causes, becomes baffled in achieving
the ultimate goal of life and is thus subjected to the routine of being
promoted to the higher planets and then again coming down, as if
situated on a ferris wheel which sometimes goes up and sometimes comes
down. The purport is that instead of being elevated to the spiritual
world where there is no longer any possibility of coming down, one
simply revolves in the cycle of birth and death on higher and lower
planetary systems. One should better take to the spiritual world to



enjoy eternal life of full bliss and knowledge and never return to this
miserable material existence.

TEXT 22

ananyas cintayanto mam
ye janah paryupasate
tesam nityabhiyuktanam
yoga-ksemam vahamy aham

SYNONYMS

ananyah--no other; cintayantah--concentrating; mam--unto Me; ye--who;
janah--persons; paryupasate--properly worship; tesam--their; nitya--
always; abhiyuktanam--fixed in devotion; yoga-ksemam--requirements;
vahami--carry; aham--I.

TRANSLATION

But those who worship Me with devotion, meditating on My transcendental
form--to them I carry what they lack and preserve what they have.

PURPORT

One who is unable to live for a moment without Krsna consciousness
cannot but think of Krsna twenty-four hours, being engaged in
devotional service by hearing, chanting, remembering, offering prayers,
worshiping, serving the lotus feet of the Lord, rendering other
services, cultivating friendship and surrendering fully to the Lord.
Such activities are all auspicious and full of spiritual potencies;
indeed, they make the devotee perfect in self-realization. Then his
only desire is to achieve the association of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. This is called yoga. By the mercy of the Lord, such a devotee
never comes back to this material condition of life. Ksema refers to
the merciful protection of the Lord. The Lord helps the devotee to
achieve Krsna consciousness by yoga, and when he becomes fully Krsna
conscious the Lord protects him from falling down to a miserable
conditioned life.

TEXT 23

ye 'py anya-devata-bhakta
yajante sraddhayanvitah
te 'pi mam eva kaunteya
yajanty avidhi-purvakam

SYNONYMS

ye--those; api--also; anya--other; devata--demigods; bhaktah--devotees;
yajante--worship; sraddhaya anvitah--with faith; te--they; api--also;
mam--Me; eva--even; kaunteya--O son of Kunti; yajanti--sacrifice;
avidhi-purvakam--in a wrong way.

TRANSLATION

Whatever a man may sacrifice to other gods, O son of Kunti, is really
meant for Me alone, but it is offered without true understanding.



PURPORT

"Persons who are engaged in the worship of demigods are not very
intelligent, although such worship is done to Me indirectly," Krsna
says. For example, when a man pours water on the leaves and branches of
a tree without pouring water on the root, he does so without sufficient
knowledge or without observing regulative principles. Similarly, the
process of rendering service to the different parts of the body is to
supply food to the stomach. The demigods are, so to speak, different
officers and directors in the government of the Supreme Lord. One has
to follow the laws made by the government, not by the officers or
directors. Similarly, everyone is to offer his worship to the Supreme
Lord only. That will automatically satisfy the different officers and
directors of the Lord. The officers and directors are engaged as
representatives of the government, and to offer some bribe to the
officers and directors is illegal. This is stated here as avidhi-
purvakam. In other words, Krsna does not approve the unnecessary
worship of the demigods.

TEXT 24

aham hi sarva-yajnanam
bhokta ca prabhur eva ca
na tu mam abhijananti
tattvenatas cyavanti te

SYNONYMS

aham--I; hi--surely; sarva--of all; yajnanam--sacrifices; bhokta--
enjoyer; ca--and; prabhuh--Lord; eva--also; ca--and; na--not; tu--but;
mam--Me; abhijananti--know; tattvena--in reality; atah--therefore;
cyavanti--fall down; te--they.

TRANSLATION

I am the only enjoyer and the only object of sacrifice. Those who do
not recognize My true transcendental nature fall down.

PURPORT

Here it is clearly stated that there are many types of yajna
performances recommended in the Vedic literatures, but actually all of
them are meant for satisfying the Supreme Lord. Yajna means Visnu. In
the Second Chapter of Bhagavad-gita it is clearly stated that one
should only work for satisfying Yajna or Visnu. The perfectional form
of human civilization, known as varnasrama-dharma, is specifically
meant for satisfying Visnu. Therefore, Krsna says in this verse, "I am
the enjoyer of all sacrifices because I am the supreme master."
However, less intelligent persons, without knowing this fact, worship
demigods for temporary benefit. Therefore they fall down to material
existence and do not achieve the desired goal of life. If, however,
anyone has any material desire to be fulfilled, he had better pray for
it to the Supreme Lord (although that is not pure devotion), and he
will thus achieve the desired result.

TEXT 25

yanti deva-vrata devan



pitrn yanti pitr-vratah
bhutani yanti bhutejya
yanti mad-yajino 'pi mam

SYNONYMS

yanti--achieve; deva-vratah--worshipers of demigods; devan--to
demigods; pitrn--to ancestors; yanti--go; pitr-vratah--worshipers of
the ancestors; bhutani--to ghosts and spirits; yanti--go; bhuta-ijyah--
worshipers of ghosts and spirits; yanti--go; mat--My; yajinah--
devotees; api--also; mam--unto Me.

TRANSLATION

Those who worship the demigods will take birth among the demigods;
those who worship ghosts and spirits will take birth among such beings;
those who worship ancestors go to the ancestors; and those who worship
Me will live with Me.

PURPORT

If one has any desire to go to the moon, the sun, or any other planet,
one can attain the desired destination by following specific Vedic
principles recommended for that purpose. These are vividly described in
the fruitive activities portion of the Vedas, technically known as
darsa-paurnamasi, which recommends a specific worship of demigods
situated on different heavenly planets. Similarly, one can attain the
Pita planets by performing a specific yajna. Similarly, one can go to
many ghostly planets and become a Yaksa, Raksa or Pisaca. Pisaca
worship is called "black arts" or "black magic." There are many men who
practice this black art, and they think that it is spiritualism, but
such activities are completely materialistic. Similarly, a pure
devotee, who worships the Supreme Personality of Godhead only, achieves
the planets of Vaikuntha and Krsnaloka without a doubt. It is very easy
to understand through this important verse that if by simply worshiping
the demigods one can achieve the heavenly planets, or by worshiping the
Pitas achieve the Pita planets, or by practicing the black arts achieve
the ghostly planets, why can the pure devotee not achieve the planet of
Krsna or Visnu? Unfortunately many people have no information of these
sublime planets where Krsna and Visnu live, and because they do not
know of them they fall down. Even the impersonalists fall down from the
brahmajyoti. This Krsna consciousness movement is therefore
distributing sublime information to the entire human society to the
effect that simply by chanting the Hare Krsna mantra one can become
perfect in this life and go back home, back to Godhead.

TEXT 26

patram puspam phalam toyam
yo me bhaktya prayacchati
tad aham bhakty-upahrtam
asnami prayatatmanah

SYNONYMS

patram--a leaf; puspam--a flower; phalam--a fruit; toyam--water; yah--
whoever; me--unto Me; bhaktya--with devotion; prayacchati--offers; tat-



-that; aham--I; bhakti-upahrtam--offered in devotion; asnami--accept;
prayata-atmanah--of one in pure consciousness.

TRANSLATION

If one offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, fruit or
water, I will accept it.

PURPORT

Here Lord Krsna, having established that He is the only enjoyer, the
primeval Lord, and the real object of all sacrificial offerings,
reveals what types of sacrifices He desires to be offered. If one
wishes to engage in devotional service to the Supreme in order to be
purified and reach the goal of life--the transcendental loving service
of God--then he should find out what the Lord desires of him. One who
loves Krsna will give Him whatever He wants, and he avoids offering
anything which is undesirable or unasked for. Thus meat, fish and eggs
should not be offered to Krsna. If He desired such things as offerings,
He would have said so. Instead He clearly requests that a leaf, a
fruit, flowers and water be given to Him, and He says of this offering,
"I will accept it." Therefore, we should understand that He will not
accept meat, fish and eggs. Vegetables, grains, fruits, milk and water
are the proper foods for human beings and are prescribed by Lord Krsna
Himself. Whatever else we eat cannot be offered to Him, since He will
not accept it. Thus we cannot be acting on the level of loving devotion
if we offer such foods.
In the Third Chapter, verse thirteen, Sri Krsna explains that only the
remains of sacrifice are purified and fit for consumption by those who
are seeking advancement in life and release from the clutches of the
material entanglement. Those who do not make an offering of their food,
He says in the same verse, are said to be eating only sin. In other
words, their every mouthful is simply deepening their involvement in
the complexities of material nature. But preparing nice, simple
vegetable dishes, offering them before the picture or Deity of Lord
Krsna and bowing down and praying for Him to accept such a humble
offering, enables one to advance steadily in life, to purify the body,
and to create fine brain tissues which will lead to clear thinking.
Above all, the offering should be made with an attitude of love. Krsna
has no need of food, since He already possesses everything that be, yet
He will accept the offering of one who desires to please Him in that
way. The important element, in preparation, in serving and in offering,
is to act with love for Krsna.
The impersonalist philosophers, who wish to maintain that the Absolute
Truth is without senses, cannot comprehend this verse of Bhagavad-gita.
To them, it is either a metaphor or proof of the mundane character of
Krsna, the speaker of the Gita. But, in actuality, Krsna, the Supreme
Godhead, has senses, and it is stated that His senses are
interchangeable; in other words, one sense can perform the function of
any other. This is what it means to say that Krsna is absolute. Lacking
senses, He could hardly be considered full in all opulences. In the
Seventh Chapter, Krsna has explained that He impregnates the living
entities into material nature. This is done by His looking upon
material nature. And so in this instance, Krsna's hearing the devotee's
words of love in offering foodstuffs is wholly identical with His
eating and actually tasting. This point should be emphasized: because
of His absolute position, His hearing is wholly identical with His
eating and tasting. Only the devotee, who accepts Krsna as He describes



Himself, without interpretation, can understand that the Supreme
Absolute Truth can eat food and enjoy it.

TEXT 27

yat karosi yad asnasi
yaj juhosi dadasi yat
yat tapasyasi kaunteya
tat kurusva mad-arpanam

SYNONYMS

yat--whatever; karosi--you do; yat--whatever; asnasi--you eat; yat--
whatever; juhosi--you offer; dadasi--you give away; yat--whatever; yat-
-whatever; tapasyasi--austerities you perform; kaunteya--O son of
Kunti; tat--that; kurusva--make; mat--unto Me; arpanam--offering.

TRANSLATION

O son of Kunti, all that you do, all that you eat, all that you offer
and give away, as well as all austerities that you may perform, should
be done as an offering unto Me.

PURPORT

Thus, it is the duty of everyone to mold his life in such a way that he
will not forget Krsna in any circumstance. Everyone has to work for
maintenance of his body and soul together, and Krsna recommends herein
that one should work for Him. Everyone has to eat something to live;
therefore he should accept the remnants of foodstuffs offered to Krsna.
Any civilized man has to perform some religious ritualistic ceremonies;
therefore Krsna recommends, "Do it for Me," and this is called arcana.
Everyone has a tendency to give something in charity; Krsna says, "Give
it to Me," and this means that all surplus money accumulated should be
utilized in furthering the Krsna consciousness movement. Nowadays
people are very much inclined to the meditational process, which is not
practical in this age, but if anyone practices meditating on Krsna
twenty-four hours by chanting the Hare Krsna mantra round his beads, he
is surely the greatest yogi. as substantiated by the Sixth Chapter of
Bhagavad-gita.

TEXT 28

subhasubha-phalair evam
moksyase karma-bandhanaih
sannyasa-yoga-yuktatma
vimukto mam upaisyasi

SYNONYMS

subha--good; asubha--evil; phalaih--results; evam--thus; moksyase--
free; karma--action; bandhanaih--bondage; sannyasa--of renunciation;
yoga--the yoga; yukta-atma--having the mind firmly set on; vimuktah--
liberated; mam--to Me; upaisyasi--you will attain.

TRANSLATION



In this way you will be freed from all reactions to good and evil
deeds, and by this principle of renunciation you will be liberated and
come to Me.

PURPORT

One who acts in Krsna consciousness under superior direction is called
yukta. The technical term is yukta-vairagya. This is further explained
by Rupa Gosvami as follows:

anasaktasya visayan
yatharham upayunjatah
nirbandhah krsna-sambandhe
yuktam vairagyam ucyate

(Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu 2.255)
Rupa Gosvami says that as long as we are in this material world we have
to act; we cannot cease acting. Therefore if actions are performed and
the fruits are given to Krsna, then that is called yukta-vairagya.
Actually situated in renunciation, such activities clear the mirror of
the mind, and as the actor gradually makes progress in spiritual
realization he becomes completely surrendered to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Therefore at the end he becomes liberated, and
this liberation is also specified. By this liberation he does not
become one with the brahmajyoti, but rather enters into the planet of
the Supreme Lord. It is clearly mentioned here: mam upaisyasi, "he
comes to Me," back home, back to Godhead. There are five different
stages of liberation, and here it is specified that the devotee who has
always lived his lifetime here under the direction of the Supreme Lord,
as stated, has evolved to the point where he can after quitting this
body, go back to Godhead and engage directly in the association of the
Supreme Lord.
Anyone who has no other interest but to dedicate his life to the
service of the Lord is actually a sannyasi. Such a person always thinks
of himself as an eternal servant, dependent on the supreme will of the
Lord. As such, whatever he does, he does it for the benefit of the
Lord. Whatever action he performs, he performs it as service to the
Lord. He does not give serious attention to the fruitive activities or
prescribed duties mentioned in the Vedas. For ordinary persons it is
obligatory to execute the prescribed duties mentioned in the Vedas, but
although a pure devotee who is completely engaged in the service of the
Lord may sometimes appear to go against the prescribed Vedic duties,
actually it is not so.
It is said, therefore, by Vaisnava authorities that even the most
intelligent person cannot understand the plans and activities of a pure
devotee. The exact words are tanra vakya, kriya, mudra vijneha na
bujhaya (Caitanya-caritamrta, Madhya 23.39). A person who is thus
always engaged in the service of the Lord or is always thinking and
planning how to serve the Lord is to be considered completely liberated
at present and in the future. His going back home, back to Godhead, is
guaranteed. He is above all materialistic criticism, just as Krsna is
above all criticism.

TEXT 29

samo 'ham sarva-bhutesu
na me dvesyo 'sti na priyah
ye bhajanti tu mam bhaktya



mayi te tesu capy aham

SYNONYMS

samah--equally disposed; aham--I; sarva-bhutesu--to all living
entities; na--no one; me--Mine; dvesyah--hateful; asti--is; na--nor;
priyah--dear; ye--those; bhajanti--render transcendental service; tu--
yet; mam--unto Me; bhaktya--in devotion; mayi--unto Me; te--such
persons; tesu--in them; ca--also; api--certainly; aham--I.

TRANSLATION

I envy no one, nor am I partial to anyone. I am equal to all. But
whoever renders service unto Me in devotion is a friend, is in Me, and
I am also a friend to him.

PURPORT

One may question here that if Krsna is equal to everyone and no one is
His special friend, then why does He take a special interest in the
devotees who are always engaged in His transcendental service? But this
is not discrimination; it is natural. Any man in this material world
may be very charitably disposed, yet he has a special interest in his
own children. The Lord claims that every living entity--in whatever
form is His son, and as such He provides everyone with a generous
supply of the necessities of life. He is just like a cloud which pours
rain all over, regardless of whether it falls on rock or land or water.
But for His devotees, He gives specific attention. Such devotees are
mentioned here: they are always in Krsna consciousness, and therefore
they are always transcendentally situated in Krsna. The very phrase
"Krsna consciousness" suggests that those who are in such consciousness
are living transcendentalists, situated in Him. The Lord says here
distinctly, mayi te, "in Me." Naturally, as a result, the Lord is also
in them. This is reciprocal. This also explains the words ye yatha mam
prapadyante tams tathaiva bhajamy aham: "Whoever surrenders unto Me,
proportionately I take care of him." This transcendental reciprocation
exists because both the Lord and the devotee are conscious. When a
diamond is set in a golden ring, it looks very nice. The gold is
glorified, and at the same time the diamond is glorified. The Lord and
the living entity eternally glitter, and when a living entity becomes
inclined to the service of the Supreme Lord he looks like gold. The
Lord is a diamond, and so this combination is very nice. Living
entities in a pure state are called devotees. The Supreme Lord becomes
the devotee of His devotees. If a reciprocal relationship is not
present between the devotee and the Lord, then there is no personalist
philosophy. In the impersonal philosophy there is no reciprocation
between the Supreme and the living entity, but in the personalist
philosophy there is.
The example is often given that the Lord is like a desire tree, and
whatever one wants from this desire tree, the Lord supplies. But here
the explanation is more complete. The Lord is here stated to be partial
to the devotees. This is the manifestation of the Lord's special mercy
to the devotees. The Lord's reciprocation should not be considered to
be under the law of karma. It belongs to the transcendental situation
in which the Lord and His devotees function. Devotional service of the
Lord is not an activity of this material world; it is part of the
spiritual world, where eternity, bliss and knowledge predominate.



TEXT 30

api cet su-duracaro
bhajate mam ananya-bhak
sadhur eva sa mantavyah
samyag vyavasito hi sah

SYNONYMS

api--in spite of; cet--although; su-duracarah--one committing the most
abominable actions; bhajate--engaged in devotional service; mam--unto
Me; ananya-bhak--without deviation; sadhuh--saint; eva--certainly; sah-
-he; mantavyah--to be considered; samyak--completely; vyavasitah--
situated; hi--certainly; sah--he.

TRANSLATION

Even if one commits the most abominable actions, if he is engaged in
devotional service, he is to be considered saintly because he is
properly situated.

PURPORT

The word su-duracarah used in this verse is very significant, and we
should understand it properly. When a living entity is conditioned, he
has two kinds of activities: one is conditional, and the other is
constitutional. As for protecting the body or abiding by the rules of
society and state, certainly there are different activities, even for
the devotees, in connection with the conditional life, and such
activities are called conditional. Besides these, the living entity who
is fully conscious of his spiritual nature and is engaged in Krsna
consciousness, or the devotional service of the Lord, has activities
which are called transcendental. Such activities are performed in his
constitutional position, and they are technically called devotional
service. Now, in the conditioned state, sometimes devotional service
and the conditional service in relation to the body will parallel one
another. But then again, sometimes these activities become opposed to
one another. As far as possible, a devotee is very cautious so that he
does not do anything that could disrupt his wholesome condition. He
knows that perfection in his activities depends on his progressive
realization of Krsna consciousness. Sometimes, however, it may be seen
that a person in Krsna consciousness commits some act which may be
taken as most abominable socially or politically. But such a temporary
falldown does not disqualify him. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is stated
that if a person falls down but is wholeheartedly engaged in the
transcendental service of the Supreme Lord, the Lord, being situated
within his heart, beautifies him and excuses him from that abomination.
The material contamination is so strong that even a yogi fully engaged
in the service of the Lord sometimes becomes ensnared; but Krsna
consciousness is so strong that such an occasional falldown is at once
rectified. Therefore the process of devotional service is always a
success. No one should deride a devotee for some accidental falldown
from the ideal path, for, as is explained in the next verse, such
occasional falldowns will be stopped in due course, as soon as a
devotee is completely situated in Krsna consciousness.
Therefore a person who is situated in Krsna consciousness and is
engaged with determination in the process of chanting Hare Krsna, Hare
Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare



Hare should be considered to be in the transcendental position, even if
by chance or accident he is found to have fallen. The words sadhur eva,
"he is saintly," are very emphatic. They are a warning to the
nondevotees that because of an accidental falldown a devotee should not
be derided; he should still be considered saintly even if he has fallen
down accidentally. And the word mantavyah is still more emphatic. If
one does not follow this rule, and derides a devotee for his accidental
falldown, then he is disobeying the order of the Supreme Lord. The only
qualification of a devotee is to be unflinchingly and exclusively
engaged in devotional service.
The mark of a spot which may be seen on the moon does not become an
impediment to the moonlight. Similarly, the accidental falldown of a
devotee from the path of a saintly character does not make him
abominable. On the other hand, one should not misunderstand that a
devotee in transcendental devotional service can act in all kinds of
abominable ways; this verse only refers to an accident due to the
strong power of material connections. Devotional service is more or
less a declaration of war against the illusory energy. As long as one
is not strong enough to fight the illusory energy, there may be
accidental falldowns. But when one is strong enough, he is no longer
subjected to such falldowns, as previously explained. No one should
take advantage of this verse and commit nonsense and think that he is
still a devotee. If he does not improve in his character by devotional
service, then it is to be understood that he is not a high devotee.

TEXT 31

ksipram bhavati dharmatma
sasvac-chantim nigacchati
kaunteya pratijanihi
na me bhaktah pranasyati

SYNONYMS

ksipram--very soon; bhavati--becomes; dharma-atma--righteous; sasvat-
santim--lasting peace; nigacchati--attains; kaunteya--O son of Kunti;
pratijanihi--justly declare; na--never; me--Mine; bhaktah--devotees;
pranasyati--perishes.

TRANSLATION

He quickly becomes righteous and attains lasting peace. O son of Kunti,
declare it boldly that My devotee never perishes.

PURPORT

This should not be misunderstood. In the Seventh Chapter the Lord says
that one who is engaged in mischievous activities cannot become a
devotee of the Lord. One who is not a devotee of the Lord has no good
qualifications whatsoever. The question remains, then, How can a person
engaged in abominable activities--either by accident or intention--be a
pure devotee? This question may justly be raised. The miscreants, as
stated in the Seventh Chapter, who never come to the devotional service
of the Lord, have no good qualifications, as is stated in the Srimad-
Bhagavatam. Generally, a devotee who is engaged in the nine kinds of
devotional activities is engaged in the process of cleansing all
material contamination from the heart. He puts the Supreme Personality
of Godhead within his heart, and all sinful contaminations are



naturally washed away. Continuous thinking of the Supreme Lord makes
him pure by nature. According to the Vedas, there is a certain
regulation that if one falls down from his exalted position, he has to
undergo certain ritualistic processes to purify himself. But here there
is no such condition because the purifying process is already there in
the heart of the devotee, due to his remembering the Supreme
Personality of Godhead constantly. Therefore, the chanting of Hare
Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama
Rama, Hare Hare should be continued without stoppage. This will protect
a devotee from all accidental falldowns. He will thus remain
perpetually free from all material contaminations.

TEXT 32

mam hi partha vyapasritya
ye 'pi syuh papa-yonayah
striyo vaisyas tatha sudras
te 'pi yanti param gatim

SYNONYMS

mam--unto Me; hi--certainly; partha--O son of Prtha; vyapasritya--
particularly taking shelter; ye--anyone; api--also; syuh--becomes;
papa-yonayah--born of a lower family; striyah--women; vaisyah--
mercantile people; tatha--also; sudrah--lower-class men; te api--even
they; yanti--go; param--supreme; gatim--destination.

TRANSLATION

O son of Prtha, those who take shelter in Me, though they be of lower
birth--women, vaisyas [merchants], as well as sudras [workers]--can
approach the supreme destination.

PURPORT

It is clearly declared here by the Supreme Lord that in devotional
service there is no distinction between the lower or higher classes of
people. In the material conception of life, there are such divisions,
but for a person engaged in transcendental devotional service to the
Lord, there are not. Everyone is eligible for the supreme destination.
In the Srimad-Bhagavatam (2.4.18) it is stated that even the lowest,
who are called candalas (dog-eaters), can be elevated by association
with a pure devotee. Therefore devotional service and guidance of a
pure devotee are so strong that there is no discrimination between the
lower and higher classes of men; anyone can take to it. The most simple
man taking shelter of the pure devotee can be purified by proper
guidance. According to the different modes of material nature, men are
classified in the mode of goodness (brahmanas), the mode of passion
(ksatriyas, or administrators), the mixed modes of passion and
ignorance (vaisyas, or merchants), and the mode of ignorance (sudras,
or workers). Those lower than them are called candalas, and they are
born in sinful families. Generally, those who are born in sinful
families are not accepted by the higher classes. But the process of
devotional service and the pure devotee of the Supreme God are so
strong that all the lower classes can attain the highest perfection of
life. This is possible only when one takes shelter of Krsna. One has to
take shelter completely of Krsna. Then one can become much greater than
great jnanis and yogis.



TEXT 33

kim punar brahmanah punya
bhakta rajarsayas tatha
anityam asukham lokam
imam prapya bhajasva mam

SYNONYMS

kim--how much; punah--again; brahmanah--brahmanas; punyah--righteous;
bhaktah--devotees; raja-rsayah--saintly kings; tatha--also; anityam--
temporary; asukham--sorrowful; lokam--planet; imam--this; prapya--
gaining; bhajasva--are engaged in loving service; mam--unto Me.

TRANSLATION

How much greater then are the brahmanas, the righteous, the devotees
and saintly kings who in this temporary miserable world engage in
loving service unto Me.

PURPORT

In this material world there are classifications of people, but, after
all, this world is not a happy place for anyone. It is clearly stated
here, anityam asukham lokam: this world is temporary and full of
miseries, not habitable for any sane gentleman. This world is declared
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead to be temporary and full of
miseries. Some of the philosophers, especially the minor philosophers,
say that this world is false, but we can understand from Bhagavad-gita
that the world is not false; it is temporary. There is a difference
between temporary and false. This world is temporary, but there is
another world, which is eternal. This world is miserable, but the other
world is eternal and blissful.
Arjuna was born in a saintly royal family. To him also the Lord says,
"Take to My devotional service and come quickly back to Godhead, back
home." No one should remain in this temporary world, full as it is with
miseries. Everyone should attach himself to the bosom of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead so that he can be eternally happy. The
devotional service of the Supreme Lord is the only process by which all
problems of all classes of men can be solved. Everyone should therefore
take to Krsna consciousness and make his life perfect.

TEXT 34

man-mana bhava mad-bhakto
mad-yaji mam namaskuru
mam evaisyasi yuktvaivam
atmanam mat-parayanah

SYNONYMS

mat-manah--always thinking of Me; bhava--become; mat--My; bhaktah--
devotee; mat--My; yaji--worshiper; mam--unto Me; namaskuru--offer
obeisances; mam--unto Me; eva--completely; esyasi--come; yuktva evam--
being absorbed; atmanam--your soul; mat-parayanah--devoted to Me.

TRANSLATION



Engage your mind always in thinking of Me, offer obeisances and worship
Me. Being completely absorbed in Me, surely you will come to Me.

PURPORT

In this verse it is clearly indicated that Krsna consciousness is the
only means of being delivered from the clutches of this contaminated
material world. Sometimes unscrupulous commentators distort the meaning
of what is clearly stated here: that all devotional service should be
offered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. Unfortunately,
unscrupulous commentators divert the mind of the reader to that which
is not at all feasible. Such commentators do not know that there is no
difference between Krsna's mind and Krsna. Krsna is not an ordinary
human being; He is Absolute Truth. His body, mind and He Himself are
one and absolute. It is stated in the Kurma Purana, as it is quoted by
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami in his Anubhasya comments on the
Caitanya-caritamrta (Fifth Chapter, Adi-lila, verses 41-48), deha-dehi-
vibhedo 'yam nesvare vidyate kvacit. This means that there is no
difference in Krsna, the Supreme Lord, between Himself and His body.
But, because they do not know this science of Krsna, the commentators
hide Krsna and divide His personality from His mind or from His body.
Although this is sheer ignorance of the science of Krsna, some men make
profit out of misleading the people.
There are some who are demonic; they also think of Krsna, but
enviously, just like King Kamsa, Krsna's uncle. He was also thinking of
Krsna always, but he thought of Krsna as his enemy. He was always in
anxiety, wondering when Krsna would come to kill him. That kind of
thinking will not help us. One should be thinking of Krsna in
devotional love. That is bhakti. One should cultivate the knowledge of
Krsna continually. What is that favorable cultivation? It is to learn
from a bona fide teacher. Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
and we have several times explained that His body is not material, but
is eternal, blissful knowledge. This kind of talk about Krsna will help
one become a devotee. Otherwise, understanding Krsna from the wrong
source will prove fruitless.
One should therefore engage his mind in the eternal form, the primal
form of Krsna; with conviction in his heart that Krsna is the Supreme,
he should engage himself in worship. There are hundreds of thousands of
temples in India for the worship of Krsna, and devotional service is
practiced there. When such practice is made, one has to offer
obeisances to Krsna. One should lower his head before the Deity and
engage his mind, his body, his activities--everything. That will make
one fully absorbed in Krsna without deviation. This will help one
transfer into the Krsnaloka. One should not be deviated by unscrupulous
commentators. One must engage in the nine different processes of
devotional service, beginning with hearing and chanting about Krsna.
Pure devotional service is the highest achievement of human society.
In the Seventh and Eighth chapters of Bhagavad-gita, pure devotional
service to the Lord has been explained, apart from the yoga of
knowledge and mystic yoga or fruitive activities. Those who are not
purely sanctified may be attracted by different features of the Lord,
like the impersonal brahmajyoti and localized Paramatma, but a pure
devotee directly takes to the service of the Supreme Lord.
There is a beautiful poem about Krsna in which it is clearly stated
that any person who is engaged in the worship of demigods is most
unintelligent and cannot achieve at any time the supreme award of
Krsna. The devotee, in the beginning, may sometimes fall from the



standard, but still he should be considered superior to all other
philosophers and yogis. One who always engages in Krsna consciousness
should be understood to be the perfect saintly person. His accidental
nondevotional activities will diminish, and he will soon be situated
without any doubt in complete perfection. The pure devotee has no
actual chance to fall down because the Supreme Godhead personally takes
care of His pure devotees. Therefore, the intelligent person should
take directly to this process of Krsna consciousness and happily live
in this material world. He will eventually receive the supreme award of
Krsna.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Ninth Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of the Most Confidential Knowledge.

“Bhagavad-gita As It Is” by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
Prabhupada.

COPYRIGHT NOTICE: This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of
this book, and is NOT FOR RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended for
personal non-commercial use only, under the “fair use” guidelines
established by international copyright laws. You may use this
electronic file to evaluate the printed version of this book, for your
own private use, or for short excerpts used in academic works,
research, student papers, presentations, and the like. You can
distribute this evaluation copy to others over the Internet, so long as
you keep this copyright information intact. You may not reproduce more
than ten percent (10%) of this book in any media without the express
written permission from the copyright holders. Reference any excerpts
in the following way: “Excerpted from “Bhagavad-gita As It Is” by A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, courtesy of the Bhaktivedanta Book
Trust International, www.Krishna.com.”

This book and electronic file is Copyright 1972-2003 Bhaktivedanta Book
Trust International, 3764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90034, USA.
All rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or to
evaluate dozens of other books in this collection, visit the website of
the publishers, www.Krishna.com.

Chapter 10
The Opulence of the Absolute

TEXT 1

sri-bhagavan uvaca
bhuya eva maha-baho
srnu me paramam vacah
yat te 'ham priyamanaya
vaksyami hita-kamyaya

SYNONYMS

sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; bhuyah--
again; eva--certainly; maha-baho--O mighty-armed; srnu--just hear; me--
My; paramam--supreme; vacah--information; yat--that which; te--to you;



aham--I; priyamanaya--thinking you dear to Me; vaksyami--say; hita-
kamyaya--for your benefit.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Lord said: My dear friend, mighty-armed Arjuna, listen
again to My supreme word, which I shall impart to you for your benefit
and which will give you great joy.

PURPORT

The word bhagavan is explained thus by Parasara Muni: one who is full
in six opulences, who has full strength, full fame, wealth, knowledge,
beauty and renunciation, is Bhagavan, or the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. While Krsna was present on this earth, He displayed all six
opulences. Therefore great sages like Parasara Muni have all accepted
Krsna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Now Krsna is instructing
Arjuna in more confidential knowledge of His opulences and His work.
Previously, beginning with the Seventh Chapter, the Lord already
explained His different energies and how they are acting. Now in this
chapter He explains His specific opulences to Arjuna. In the previous
chapter He has clearly explained His different energies to establish
devotion in firm conviction. Again in this chapter He tells Arjuna
about His manifestations and various opulences.
The more one hears about the Supreme God, the more one becomes fixed in
devotional service. One should always hear about the Lord in the
association of devotees; that will enhance one's devotional service.
Discourses in the society of devotees can take place only among those
who are really anxious to be in Krsna consciousness. Others cannot take
part in such discourses. The Lord clearly tells Arjuna that because he
is very dear to Him, for his benefit such discourses are taking place.

TEXT 2

na me viduh sura-ganah
prabhavam na maharsayah
aham adir hi devanam
maharsinam ca sarvasah

SYNONYMS

na--never; me--My; viduh--knows; sura-ganah--demigods; prabhavam--
opulences; na--never; maha-rsayah--great sages; aham--I am; adih--the
origin; hi--certainly; devanam--of the demigods; maha-rsinam--of the
great sages; ca--also; sarvasah--in all respects.

TRANSLATION

Neither the hosts of demigods nor the great sages know My origin, for,
in every respect, I am the source of the demigods and the sages.

PURPORT

As stated in the Brahma-samhita, Lord Krsna is the Supreme Lord. No one
is greater than Him; He is the cause of all causes. Here it is also
stated by the Lord personally that He is the cause of all the demigods
and sages. Even the demigods and great sages cannot understand Krsna;
they can understand neither His name nor His personality, so what is



the position of the so-called scholars of this tiny planet? No one can
understand why this Supreme God comes to earth as an ordinary human
being and executes such commonplace and yet wonderful activities. One
should know, then, that scholarship is not the qualification necessary
to understand Krsna. Even the demigods and the great sages have tried
to understand Krsna by their mental speculation, and they have failed
to do so. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam also it is clearly said that even
the great demigods are not able to understand the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. They can speculate to the limits of their imperfect senses
and can reach the opposite conclusion of impersonalism, of something
not manifested by the three qualities of material nature, or they can
imagine something by mental speculation, but it is not possible to
understand Krsna by such foolish speculation.
Here the Lord indirectly says that if anyone wants to know the Absolute
Truth, "Here I am present as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. I am
the Supreme." One should know this. Although one cannot understand the
inconceivable Lord who is personally present, He nonetheless exists. We
can actually understand Krsna, who is eternal, full of bliss and
knowledge, simply by studying His words in Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-
Bhagavatam. The impersonal Brahman can be conceived by persons who are
already in the inferior energy of the Lord, but the Personality of
Godhead cannot be conceived unless one is in the transcendental
position.
Because most men cannot understand Krsna in His actual situation, out
of His causeless mercy He descends to show favor to such speculators.
Yet despite the Supreme Lord's uncommon activities, these speculators,
due to contamination in the material energy, still think that the
impersonal Brahman is the Supreme. Only the devotees who are fully
surrendered unto the Supreme Lord can understand, by the grace of the
Supreme Personality, that He is Krsna. The devotees of the Lord do not
bother about the impersonal Brahman conception of God; their faith and
devotion bring them to surrender immediately unto the Supreme Lord, and
out of the causeless mercy of Krsna, they can understand Krsna. No one
else can understand Him. So even great sages agree: What is atma, what
is the Supreme? It is He whom we have to worship.

TEXT 3

yo mam ajam anadim ca
vetti loka-mahesvaram
asammudhah sa martyesu
sarva-papaih pramucyate

SYNONYMS

yah--anyone who; mam--unto Me; ajam--unborn; anadim--without beginning;
ca--also; vetti--knows; loka--the planets; maha-isvaram--the supreme
master; asammudhah--without doubt; sah--he; martyesu--among those
subject to death; sarva-papaih--from all sinful reactions; pramucyate--
is delivered.

TRANSLATION

He who knows Me as the unborn, as the beginningless, as the Supreme
Lord of all the worlds--he, undeluded among men, is freed from all
sins.

PURPORT



As stated in the Seventh Chapter (7.3), those who are trying to elevate
themselves to the platform of spiritual realization are not ordinary
men. They are superior to millions and millions of ordinary men who
have no knowledge of spiritual realization, but out of those actually
trying to understand their spiritual situation, one who can come to the
understanding that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
proprietor of everything, the unborn, is the most successful
spiritually realized person. In that stage only, when one has fully
understood Krsna's supreme position, can one be free completely from
all sinful reactions.
Here the word aja, meaning unborn, should not be confused with the
living entities, who are described in the Second Chapter as aja. The
Lord is different from the living entities who are taking birth and
dying due to material attachment. The conditioned souls are changing
their bodies, but His body is not changeable. Even when He comes to
this material world, He comes as the same unborn; therefore in the
Fourth Chapter it is said that the Lord, by His internal potency, is
not under the inferior material energy, but is always in the superior
energy.
He was existing before the creation, and He is different from His
creation. All the demigods were created within this material world, but
as far as Krsna is concerned, it is said that He is not created;
therefore Krsna is different even from the great demigods like Brahma
and Siva. And because He is the creator of Brahma, Siva and all the
other demigods, He is the Supreme Person of all planets.
Sri Krsna is therefore different from everything that is created, and
anyone who knows Him as such immediately becomes liberated from all
sinful reaction. One must be liberated from all sinful activities to be
in the knowledge of the Supreme Lord. Only by devotional service can He
be known and not by any other means, as stated in Bhagavad-gita.
One should not try to understand Krsna as a human being. As stated
previously, only a foolish person thinks Him to be a human being. This
is again expressed here in a different way. A man who is not foolish,
who is intelligent enough to understand the constitutional position of
the Godhead, is always free from all sinful reactions.
If Krsna is known as the son of Devaki, then how can He be unborn? That
is also explained in the Srimad-Bhagavatam: When He appeared before
Devaki and Vasudeva, He was not born as an ordinary child; He appeared
in His original form, and then He transformed Himself into an ordinary
child.
Anything done under the direction of Krsna is transcendental. It cannot
be contaminated by the material reactions, which may be auspicious or
inauspicious. The conception that there are things auspicious and
inauspicious in the material world is more or less a mental concoction
because there is nothing auspicious in the material world. Everything
is inauspicious because the very material mask is inauspicious. We
simply imagine it to be auspicious. Real auspiciousness depends on
activities in Krsna consciousness in full devotion and service.
Therefore if we at all want our activities to be auspicious, then we
should work under the directions of the Supreme Lord. Such directions
are given in authoritative scriptures such as Srimad-Bhagavatam and
Bhagavad-gita, or from a bona fide spiritual master. Because the
spiritual master is the representative of the Supreme Lord, his
direction is directly the direction of the Supreme Lord. The spiritual
master, saintly persons and scriptures direct in the same way. There is
no contradiction in these three sources. All actions done under such
direction are free from the reactions of pious or impious activities of



this material world. The transcendental attitude of the devotee in the
performance of activities is actually that of renunciation, and this is
called sannyasa. Anyone acting under the direction of the Supreme Lord
is actually a sannyasi and a yogi, and not the man who has simply taken
the dress of the sannyasi, or a pseudo yogi.

TEXTS 4-5

buddhir jnanam asammohah
ksama satyam damah samah
sukham duhkham bhavo 'bhavo
bhayam cabhayam eva ca

ahimsa samata tustis
tapo danam yaso 'yasah
bhavanti bhava bhutanam
matta eva prthag-vidhah

SYNONYMS

buddhih--intelligence; jnanam--knowledge; asammohah--freedom from
doubt; ksama--forgiveness; satyam--truthfulness; damah--control of the
senses; samah--control of the mind; sukham--happiness; duhkham--
distress; bhavah--birth; abhavah--death; bhayam--fear; ca--and;
abhayam--without fear; eva--also; ca--and; ahimsa--nonviolence; samata-
-equilibrium; tustih--satisfaction; tapah--penance; danam--charity;
yasah--fame; ayasah--infamy; bhavanti--become; bhavah--natures;
bhutanam--of living entities; mattah--from Me; eva--certainly; prthak-
vidhah--differently arranged.

TRANSLATION

Intelligence, knowledge, freedom from doubt and delusion, forgiveness,
truthfulness, self-control and calmness, pleasure and pain, birth,
death, fear, fearlessness, nonviolence, equanimity, satisfaction,
austerity, charity, fame and infamy are created by Me alone.

PURPORT

The different qualities of living entities, be they good or bad, are
all created by Krsna, and they are described here.
Intelligence refers to the power of analyzing things in proper
perspective, and knowledge refers to understanding what is spirit and
what is matter. Ordinary knowledge obtained by a university education
pertains only to matter, and it is not accepted here as knowledge.
Knowledge means knowing the distinction between spirit and matter. In
modern education there is no knowledge about the spirit; they are
simply taking care of the material elements and bodily needs. Therefore
academic knowledge is not complete.
Asammoha, freedom from doubt and delusion, can be achieved when one is
not hesitant and when he understands the transcendental philosophy.
Slowly but surely he becomes free from bewilderment. Nothing should be
accepted blindly; everything should be accepted with care and with
caution. Ksama, forgiveness, should be practiced, and one should excuse
the minor offenses of others. Satyam, truthfulness, means that facts
should be presented as they are for the benefit of others. Facts should
not be misrepresented. According to social conventions, it is said that
one can speak the truth only when it is palatable to others. But that



is not truthfulness. The truth should be spoken in a straightforward
way, so that others will understand actually what the facts are. If a
man is a thief and if people are warned that he is a thief, that is
truth. Although sometimes the truth is unpalatable, one should not
refrain from speaking it. Truthfulness demands that the facts be
presented as they are for the benefit of others. That is the definition
of truth.
Self-control means that the senses should not be used for unnecessary
personal enjoyment. There is no prohibition against meeting the proper
needs of the senses but unnecessary sense enjoyment is detrimental for
spiritual advancement. Therefore the senses should be restrained from
unnecessary use. Similarly, the mind should not indulge in unnecessary
thoughts; that is called sama, or calmness. Nor should one spend one's
time pondering over earning money. That is a misuse of the thinking
power. The mind should be used to understand the prime necessity of
human beings, and that should be presented authoritatively. The power
of thought should be developed in association with persons who are
authorities in the scriptures, saintly persons and spiritual masters
and those whose thinking is highly developed. Sukham, pleasure or
happiness, should always be in that which is favorable for the
cultivation of the spiritual knowledge of Krsna consciousness. And
similarly, that which is painful or which causes distress is that which
is unfavorable for the cultivation of Krsna consciousness. Anything
favorable for the development of Krsna consciousness should be
accepted, and anything unfavorable should be rejected.
Bhava, birth, should be understood to refer to the body. As far as the
soul is concerned, there is neither birth nor death; that we have
discussed in the beginning of Bhagavad-gita. Birth and death apply to
one's embodiment in the material world. Fear is due to worrying about
the future. A person in Krsna consciousness has no fear because by his
activities he is sure to go back to the spiritual sky, back home, back
to Godhead. Therefore his future is very bright. Others, however, do
not know what their future holds; they have no knowledge of what the
next life holds. So they are therefore in constant anxiety. If we want
to get free from anxiety, then the best course is to understand Krsna
and be situated always in Krsna consciousness. In that way we will be
free from all fear. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.2.37) it is stated
that fear is caused by our absorption in the illusory energy, but those
who are free from the illusory energy, those who are confident that
they are not the material body, that they are spiritual parts of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and are therefore engaged in the
transcendental service of the Supreme Godhead, have nothing to fear.
Their future is very bright. This fear is a condition of persons who
are not in Krsna consciousness. Abhayam, fearlessness, is only possible
for one in Krsna consciousness.
Ahimsa, nonviolence, means that one should not do anything which will
put others into misery or confusion. Material activities that are
promised by so many politicians, sociologists, philanthropists, etc.,
do not produce very good results because the politicians and
philanthropists have no transcendental vision; they do not know what is
actually beneficial for human society. Ahimsa means that people should
be trained in such a way that the full utilization of the human body
can be achieved. The human body is meant for spiritual realization, so
any movement or any commissions which do not further that end commit
violence on the human body. That which furthers the future spiritual
happiness of the people in general is called nonviolence.
Samata, equanimity, refers to freedom from attachment and aversion. To
be very much attached or to be very much detached is not the best. This



material world should be accepted without attachment or aversion.
Similarly, that which is favorable for prosecuting Krsna consciousness
should be accepted; that which is unfavorable should be rejected. That
is called samata, equanimity. A person in Krsna consciousness has
nothing to reject and nothing to accept unless it is useful in the
prosecution of Krsna consciousness.
Tusti, satisfaction, means that one should not be eager to gather more
and more material goods by unnecessary activity. One should be
satisfied with whatever is obtained by the grace of the Supreme Lord;
that is called satisfaction. Tapas means austerity or penance. There
are many rules and definitions in the Vedas which apply here, like
rising early in the morning and taking a bath. Sometimes it is very
troublesome to rise early in the morning, but whatever voluntary
trouble one may suffer in this way is called penance. Similarly, there
are prescriptions for fasting on certain days of the month. One may not
be inclined to practice such fasting, but because of his determination
to make advancement in the science of Krsna consciousness, he should
accept such bodily troubles which are recommended. However, one should
not fast unnecessarily or against Vedic injunctions. One should not
fast for some political purpose; that is described in Bhagavad-gita as
fasting in ignorance, and anything done in ignorance or passion does
not lead to spiritual advancement. Everything done in the mode of
goodness does advance one, however, and fasting done in terms of the
Vedic injunctions enriches one in spiritual knowledge.
As far as charity is concerned, one should give fifty percent of his
earnings to some good cause. And what is a good cause? It is that which
is conducted in terms of Krsna consciousness. That is not only a good
cause, but it is the best cause. Because Krsna is good, His cause is
also good. Thus charity should be given to a person who is engaged in
Krsna consciousness. According to Vedic literature, it is enjoined that
charity should be given to the brahmanas. This practice is still
followed, although not very nicely in terms of the Vedic injunction.
But still the injunction is that charity should be given to the
brahmanas. Why? Because they are engaged in higher cultivation of
spiritual knowledge. A brahmana is supposed to devote his whole life to
understanding Brahman. A brahma-jana is one who knows Brahman; he is
called a brahmana. Thus charity is offered to the brahmanas because
since they are always engaged in higher spiritual service they have no
time to earn their livelihood. In the Vedic literature, charity is also
to be awarded to the renouncer of life, the sannyasi. The sannyasis beg
from door to door, not for money but for missionary purposes. The
system is that they go from door to door to awaken the householders
from the slumber of ignorance. Because the householders are engaged in
family affairs and have forgotten their actual purpose in life--
awakening their Krsna consciousness--it is the business of the
sannyasis to go as beggars to the householders and encourage them to be
Krsna conscious. As it is said in the Vedas, one should awake and
achieve what is due him in this human form of life. This knowledge and
method is distributed by the sannyasis; hence charity is to be given to
the renouncer of life, to the brahmanas, and similar good causes, not
to any whimsical cause.
Yasas, fame, should be according to Lord Caitanya, who said that a man
is famous when he is known as a great devotee. That is real fame. If
one has become a great man in Krsna consciousness and it is known, then
he is truly famous. One who does not have such fame is infamous.
All these qualities are manifest throughout the universe in human
society and in the society of the demigods. There are many forms of
humanity on other planets, and these qualities are there. Now, for one



who wants to advance in Krsna consciousness, Krsna creates all these
qualities, but the person develops them himself from within. One who
engages in the devotional service of the Supreme Lord develops all the
good qualities, as arranged by the Supreme Lord.
Of whatever we find, good or bad, the origin is Krsna. Nothing can
manifest in this material world which is not in Krsna. That is
knowledge; although we know that things are differently situated, we
should realize that everything flows from Krsna.

TEXT 6

maharsayah sapta purve
catvaro manavas tatha
mad-bhava manasa jata
yesam loka imah prajah

SYNONYMS

maha-rsayah--the great sages; sapta--seven; purve--before; catvarah--
four; manavah--Manus; tatha--also; mat-bhavah--born of Me; manasah--
from the mind; jatah--born; yesam--of them; loke--the planets; imah--
all this; prajah--population.

TRANSLATION

The seven great sages and before them the four other great sages and
the Manus [progenitors of mankind] are born out of My mind, and all
creatures in these planets descend from them.

PURPORT

The Lord is giving a genealogical synopsis of the universal population.
Brahma is the original creature born out of the energy of the Supreme
Lord known as Hiranyagarbha. And from Brahma all the seven great sages,
and before them four other great sages, namely Sanaka, Sananda,
Sanatana and Sanat-kumara, and the Manus, are manifest. All these
twenty-five great sages are known as the patriarchs of the living
entities all over the universe. There are innumerable universes and
innumerable planets within each universe, and each planet is full of
population of different varieties. All of them are born of these
twenty-five patriarchs. Brahma underwent penance for one thousand years
of the demigods before he realized by the grace of Krsna how to create.
Then from Brahma Sanaka, Sananda, Sanatana and Sanat-kumara came out,
then Rudra, and then the seven sages, and in this way all the brahmanas
and ksatriyas are born out of the energy of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Brahma is known as Pitamaha, the grandfather, and Krsna is
known as the Prapitamaha, the father of the grandfather. That is stated
in the Eleventh Chapter of the Bhagavad-gita (11.39).

TEXT 7

etam vibhutim yogam ca
mama yo vetti tattvatah
so 'vikalpena yogena
yujyate natra samsayah

SYNONYMS



etam--all this; vibhutim--opulence; yogam ca--also mystic power; mama--
of Mine; yah--anyone; vetti--knows; tattvatah--factual; sah--he;
avikalpena--without division; yogena--in devotional service; yujyate--
engaged; na--never; atra--here; samsayah--doubt.

TRANSLATION

He who knows in truth this glory and power of Mine engages in unalloyed
devotional service; of this there is no doubt.

PURPORT

The highest summit of spiritual perfection is knowledge of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Unless one is firmly convinced of the different
opulences of the Supreme Lord, he cannot engage in devotional service.
Generally people know that God is great, but they do not know in detail
how God is great. Here are the details. If one knows factually how God
is great, then naturally he becomes a surrendered soul and engages
himself in the devotional service of the Lord. When one factually knows
the opulences of the Supreme, there is no alternative but to surrender
to Him. This factual knowledge can be known from the descriptions in
Srimad-Bhagavatam and Bhagavad-gita and similar literatures.
In the administration of this universe there are many demigods
distributed throughout the planetary system, and the chief of them are
Brahma, Lord Siva and the four great Kumaras and other patriarchs.
There are many forefathers of the population of the universe, and all
of them are born of the Supreme Lord Krsna. The Supreme Personality of
Godhead Krsna, is the original forefather of all forefathers.
These are some of the opulences of the Supreme Lord. When one is firmly
convinced of them, he accepts Krsna with great faith and without any
doubt, and he engages in devotional service. All this particular
knowledge is required in order to increase one's interest in the loving
devotional service of the Lord. One should not neglect to understand
fully how great Krsna is, for by knowing the greatness of Krsna one
will be able to be fixed in sincere devotional service.

TEXT 8

aham sarvasya prabhavo
mattah sarvam pravartate
iti matva bhajante mam
budha bhava-samanvitah

SYNONYMS

aham--I; sarvasya--of all; prabhavah--source of generation; mattah--
from Me; sarvam--everything; pravartate--emanates; iti--thus; matva--
knowing; bhajante--becomes devoted; mam--unto Me; budhah--learned;
bhava-samanvitah--with great attention.

TRANSLATION

I am the source of all spiritual and material worlds. Everything
emanates from Me. The wise who know this perfectly engage in My
devotional service and worship Me with all their hearts.

PURPORT



A learned scholar who has studied the Vedas perfectly and has
information from authorities like Lord Caitanya and who knows how to
apply these teachings can understand that Krsna is the origin of
everything in both the material and spiritual worlds, and because he
knows this perfectly he becomes firmly fixed in the devotional service
of the Supreme Lord. He can never be deviated by any amount of
nonsensical commentaries or by fools. All Vedic literature agrees that
Krsna is the source of Brahma, Siva and all other demigods. In the
Atharva Veda (Gopala-tapani Upanisad 1.24) it is said, yo brahmanam
vidadhati purvam yo vai vedams ca gapayati sma krsnah: "It was Krsna
who in the beginning instructed Brahma in Vedic knowledge and who
disseminated Vedic knowledge in the past." Then again the Narayana
Upanisad says,(1) atha puruso ha vai narayano 'kamayata prajah
srjeyeti: "Then the Supreme Personality Narayana desired to create
living entities." Again it is said, narayanad brahma jayate, narayanad
prajapatih prajayate, narayanad indro jayate, narayanad astau vasavo
jayante, narayanad ekadasa rudra jayante, narayanad dvadasadityah:
"From Narayana, Brahma is born, and from Narayana, the patriarchs are
also born. From Narayana, Indra is born, from Narayana the eight Vasus
are born, from Narayana the eleven Rudras are born, from Narayana the
twelve Adityas are born."
It is said in the same Vedas, brahmanyo devaki-putrah: "The son of
Devaki, Krsna, is the Supreme Personality." (Narayana Upanisad 4) Then
it is said:

eko vai narayana asin na brahma na isano napo nagni samau neme
dyav-aprthivi na naksatrani na suryah sa ekaki na ramate tasya
dhyanantah sthasya yatra chandogaih kriyamanastakadi-samjnaka
stuti-stomah stomam ucyate.

"In the beginning of the creation there was only the Supreme
Personality Narayana. There was no Brahma, no Siva, no fire, no moon,
no stars in the sky, no sun. There was only Krsna, who creates all and
enjoys all" (Maha Upanisad 1)
In the Maha Upanisad it is said that Lord Siva was born from the
highest, the Supreme Lord Krsna, and the Vedas say that it is the
Supreme Lord, the creator of Brahma and Siva, who is to be worshiped.
In the Moksa-dharma Krsna also says,

prajapatim ca rudram capy
aham eva srjami vai
tau hi mam na vijanito
mama maya-vimohitau

"The patriarchs, Siva and others are created by Me, though they do not
know that they are created by Me because they are deluded by My
illusory energy." In the Varaha Purana it is also said,

narayanah paro devas
tasmaj jatas caturmukhah
tasmad rudro 'bhavad devah
sa ca sarva-jnatam gatah

"Narayana is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and from Him Brahma
was born, from whom Siva was born."
Lord Krsna is the source of all generations, and He is called the most
efficient cause of everything. He says that because "everything is born
of Me, I am the original source of all. Everything is under Me; no one



is above Me." There is no supreme controller other than Krsna. One who
understands Krsna in such a way from a bona fide spiritual master and
from Vedic literature, who engages all his energy in Krsna
consciousness, becomes a truly learned man. In comparison to him, all
others, who do not know Krsna properly, are but fools. Only a fool
would consider Krsna to be an ordinary man. A Krsna conscious person
should not be bewildered by fools; he should avoid all unauthorized
commentaries and interpretations on Bhagavad-gita and proceed in Krsna
consciousness with determination and firmness.

TEXT 9

mac-citta mad-gata-prana
bodhayantah parasparam
kathayantas ca mam nityam
tusyanti ca ramanti ca

SYNONYMS

mat-cittah--minds fully engaged in Me; mat-gata-pranah--lives devoted
to the service of Krsna; bodhayantah--preaching; parasparam--among
themselves; kathayantah ca--talking also; mam--about Me; nityam--
perpetually; tusyanti--are pleased; ca--also; ramanti--enjoy
transcendental bliss; ca--also.

TRANSLATION

The thoughts of My pure devotees dwell in Me, their lives are
surrendered to Me, and they derive great satisfaction and bliss
enlightening one another and conversing about Me.

PURPORT

Pure devotees, whose characteristics are mentioned here, engage
themselves fully in the transcendental loving service of the Lord.
Their minds cannot be diverted from the lotus feet of Krsna. Their
talks are solely on the transcendental subjects. The symptoms of the
pure devotees are described in this verse specifically. Devotees of the
Supreme Lord are twenty-four hours daily engaged in glorifying the
pastimes of the Supreme Lord. Their hearts and souls are constantly
submerged in Krsna, and they take pleasure in discussing Him with other
devotees.
In the preliminary stage of devotional service they relish the
transcendental pleasure from the service itself, and in the mature
stage they are actually situated in love of God. Once situated in that
transcendental position, they can relish the highest perfection which
is exhibited by the Lord in His abode. Lord Caitanya likens
transcendental devotional service to the sowing of a seed in the heart
of the living entity. There are innumerable living entities traveling
throughout the different planets of the universe, and out of them there
are a few who are fortunate enough to meet a pure devotee and get the
chance to understand devotional service. This devotional service is
just like a seed, and if it is sown in the heart of a living entity,
and if he goes on hearing and chanting, Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna
Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare, that seed
fructifies, just as the seed of a tree fructifies with regular
watering. The spiritual plant of devotional service gradually grows and
grows until it penetrates the covering of the material universe and



enters into the brahmajyoti effulgence in the spiritual sky. In the
spiritual sky also that plant grows more and more until it reaches the
highest planet, which is called Goloka Vrndavana, the supreme planet of
Krsna. Ultimately, the plant takes shelter under the lotus feet of
Krsna and rests there. Gradually as the plant grows fruits and flowers,
that plant of devotional service also produces fruits, and the watering
process in the form of chanting and hearing goes on. This plant of
devotional service is fully described in the Caitanya-caritamrta
(Madhya-lila, Chapter Nineteen). It is explained there that when the
complete plant takes shelter under the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord,
one becomes fully absorbed in love of God; then he cannot live even for
a moment without being in contact with the Supreme Lord, just as a fish
cannot live without water. In such a state, the devotee actually
attains the transcendental qualities in contact with the Supreme Lord.
The Srimad-Bhagavatam is also full of such narrations about the
relationship between the Supreme Lord and His devotees; therefore the
Srimad-Bhagavatam is very dear to the devotees. In this narration there
is nothing about material activities, sense gratification or
liberation. Srimad-Bhagavatam is the only narration in which the
transcendental nature of the Supreme Lord and His devotees is fully
described. Thus the realized souls in Krsna consciousness take
continual pleasure in hearing such transcendental literatures, just as
a young boy and girl take pleasure in association.

TEXT 10

tesam satata-yuktanam
bhajatam priti-purvakam
dadami buddhi-yogam tam
yena mam upayanti te

SYNONYMS

tesam--unto them; satata-yuktanam--always engaged; bhajatam--in
devotional service; priti-purvakam--in loving ecstasy; dadami--I give;
buddhi-yogam--real intelligence; tam--that; yena--by which; mam--unto
Me; upayanti--come; te--they.

TRANSLATION

To those who are constantly devoted and worship Me with love, I give
the understanding by which they can come to Me.

PURPORT

In this verse the word buddhi-yogam is very significant. We may
remember that in the Second Chapter the Lord, instructing Arjuna, said
that He had spoken to him of many things and that He would instruct him
in the way of buddhi-yoga. Now buddhi-yoga is explained. Buddhi-yoga
itself is action in Krsna consciousness; that is the highest
intelligence. Buddhi means intelligence, and yoga means mystic
activities or mystic elevation. When one tries to go back home, back to
Godhead, and takes fully to Krsna consciousness in devotional service,
his action is called buddhi yoga. In other words, buddhi-yoga is the
process by which one gets out of the entanglement of this material
world. The ultimate goal of progress is Krsna. People do not know this;
therefore the association of devotees and a bona fide spiritual master
are important. One should know that the goal is Krsna, and when the



goal is assigned, then the path is slowly but progressively traversed,
and the ultimate goal is achieved.
When a person knows the goal of life but is addicted to the fruits of
activities, he is acting in karma-yoga. When he knows that the goal is
Krsna, but he takes pleasure in mental speculations to understand
Krsna, he is acting in jnana-yoga. And when he knows the goal and seeks
Krsna completely in Krsna consciousness and devotional service, he is
acting in bhakti-yoga, or buddhi-yoga, which is the complete yoga. This
complete yoga is the highest perfectional stage of life.
A person may have a bona fide spiritual master and may be attached to a
spiritual organization, but still, if he is not intelligent enough to
make progress, then Krsna from within gives him instructions so that he
may ultimately come to Him without difficulty. The qualification is
that a person always engage himself in Krsna consciousness and with
love and devotion render all kinds of services. He should perform some
sort of work for Krsna, and that work should be with love. If a devotee
is intelligent enough he will make progress on the path of self-
realization. If one is sincere and devoted to the activities of
devotional service, the Lord gives him a chance to make progress and
ultimately attain to Him.

TEXT 11

tesam evanukampartham
aham ajnana-jam tamah
nasayamy atma-bhavastho
jnana-dipena bhasvata

SYNONYMS

tesam--for them; eva--certainly; anukampa-artham--to show special
mercy; aham--I; ajnana-jam--due to ignorance; tamah--darkness;
nasayami--dispel; atma--within; bhavasthah--themselves; jnana--of
knowledge; dipena--with the lamp; bhasvata--glowing.

TRANSLATION

Out of compassion for them, I, dwelling in their hearts, destroy with
the shining lamp of knowledge the darkness born of ignorance.

PURPORT

When Lord Caitanya was in Benares promulgating the chanting of Hare
Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama
Rama, Hare Hare, thousands of people were following Him. Prakasananda,
a very influential and learned scholar in Benares at that time, derided
Lord Caitanya for being a sentimentalist. Sometimes philosophers
criticize the devotees because they think that most of the devotees are
in the darkness of ignorance and are philosophically naive
sentimentalists. Actually that is not the fact. There are very, very
learned scholars who have put forward the philosophy of devotion, but
even if a devotee does not take advantage of their literatures or of
his spiritual master, if he is sincere in his devotional service he is
helped by Krsna Himself within his heart. So the sincere devotee
engaged in Krsna consciousness cannot be without knowledge. The only
qualification is that one carry out devotional service in full Krsna
consciousness.



The modern philosophers think that without discriminating one cannot
have pure knowledge. For them this answer is given by the Supreme Lord:
those who are engaged in pure devotional service, even though they be
without sufficient education and even without sufficient knowledge of
the Vedic principles, are still helped by the Supreme God, as stated in
this verse.
The Lord tells Arjuna that basically there is no possibility of
understanding the Supreme Truth, the Absolute Truth, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, simply by speculating, for the Supreme Truth is
so great that it is not possible to understand Him or to achieve Him
simply by making a mental effort. Man can go on speculating for several
millions of years, and if he is not devoted, if he is not a lover of
the Supreme Truth, he will never understand Krsna or the Supreme Truth.
Only by devotional service is the Supreme Truth, Krsna, pleased and by
His inconceivable energy He can reveal Himself to the heart of the pure
devotee. The pure devotee always has Krsna within his heart; therefore
he is just like the sun that dissipates the darkness of ignorance. This
is the special mercy rendered to the pure devotee by Krsna.
Due to the contamination of material association, through many, many
millions of births, one's heart is always covered with the dust of
materialism, but when one engages in devotional service and constantly
chants Hare Krsna, the dust quickly clears and one is elevated to the
platform of pure knowledge. The ultimate goal of Visnu can be attained
only by this chant and devotional service, and not by mental
speculation or argument. The pure devotee does not have to worry about
the necessities of life; he need not be anxious because when he removes
the darkness from his heart, everything is provided automatically by
the Supreme Lord, for He is pleased by the loving devotional service of
the devotee. This is the essence of the Gita's teachings. By studying
Bhagavad-gita, one can become a completely surrendered soul to the
Supreme Lord and engage himself in pure devotional service. As the Lord
takes charge, one becomes completely free from all kinds of
materialistic endeavors.

TEXTS 12-13

arjuna uvaca
param brahma param dhama
pavitram paramam bhavan
purusam sasvatam divyam
adi-devam ajam vibhum

ahus tvam rsayah sarve
devarsir naradas tatha
asito devalo vyasah
svayam caiva bravisi me

SYNONYMS

arjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; param--supreme; brahma--truth; param--
supreme; dhama--sustenance; pavitram--purest; paramam--supreme; bhavan-
-Yourself; purusam--personality; sasvatam--original; divyam--
transcendental; adi-devam--original Lord; ajam--unborn; vibhum--
greatest; ahuh--say; tvam--unto You; rsayah--sages; sarve--all; deva-
rsih--the sage among the demigods; naradah--Narada; tatha--also;
asitah--Asita; devalah--Devala; vyasah--Vyasa; svayam--personally; ca--
also; eva--certainly; bravisi--explaining; me--unto me.



TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: You are the Supreme Brahman, the ultimate, the supreme
abode and purifier, the Absolute Truth and the eternal divine person.
You are the primal God, transcendental and original, and You are the
unborn and all-pervading beauty. All the great sages such as Narada,
Asita, Devala, and Vyasa proclaim this of You, and now You Yourself are
declaring it to me.

PURPORT

In these two verses the Supreme Lord gives a chance to the modern
philosopher, for here it is clear that the Supreme is different from
the individual soul. Arjuna, after hearing the essential four verses of
Bhagavad-gita in this chapter, became completely free from all doubts
and accepted Krsna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He at once
boldly declares, "You are param brahma, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead." And previously Krsna stated that He is the originator of
everything and everyone. Every demigod and every human being is
dependent on Him. Men and demigods, out of ignorance, think that they
are absolute and independent of the Supreme Lord Krsna. That ignorance
is removed perfectly by the discharge of devotional service. This is
already explained in the previous verse by the Lord. Now by His grace,
Arjuna is accepting Him as the Supreme Truth, in concordance with the
Vedic injunction. It is not because Krsna is an intimate friend of
Arjuna that he is flattering Him by calling Him the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, the Absolute Truth. Whatever Arjuna says in these two
verses is confirmed by Vedic truth. Vedic injunctions affirm that only
one who takes to devotional service to the Supreme Lord can understand
Him, whereas others cannot. Each and every word of this verse spoken by
Arjuna is confirmed by Vedic injunction.
In the Kena Upanisad it is stated that the Supreme Brahman is the rest
for everything, and Krsna has already explained that everything is
resting on Him. The Mundaka Upanisad confirms that the Supreme Lord, in
whom everything is resting, can be realized only by those who engage
constantly in thinking of Him. This constant thinking of Krsna is
smaranam, one of the methods of devotional service. It is only by
devotional service to Krsna that one can understand his position and
get rid of this material body.
In the Vedas the Supreme Lord is accepted as the purest of the pure.
One who understands that Krsna is the purest of the pure can become
purified from all sinful activities. One cannot be disinfected from
sinful activities unless he surrenders unto the Supreme Lord. Arjuna's
acceptance of Krsna as the supreme pure complies with the injunctions
of Vedic literature. This is also confirmed by great personalities, of
whom Narada is the chief.
Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and one should always
meditate upon Him and enjoy one's transcendental relationship with Him.
He is the supreme existence. He is free from bodily needs, birth and
death. Not only does Arjuna confirm this, but all the Vedic
literatures, the Puranas and histories. In all Vedic literatures Krsna
is thus described, and the Supreme Lord Himself also says in the Fourth
Chapter, "Although I am unborn, I appear on this earth to establish
religious principles." He is the supreme origin; He has no cause, for
He is the cause of all causes, and everything is emanating from Him.
This perfect knowledge can be had by the grace of the Supreme Lord.
Here Arjuna expresses himself through the grace of Krsna. If we want to
understand Bhagavad-gita, we should accept the statements in these two



verses. This is called the parampara system, acceptance of the
disciplic succession. Unless one is in the disciplic succession, he
cannot understand Bhagavad-gita. It is not possible by so-called
academic education. Unfortunately those proud of their academic
education, despite so much evidence in Vedic literatures, stick to
their obstinate conviction that Krsna is an ordinary person.

TEXT 14

sarvam etad rtam manye
yan mam vadasi kesava
na hi te bhagavan vyaktim
vidur deva na danavah

SYNONYMS

sarvam--all; etat--these; rtam--truths; manye--accept; yat--which; mam-
-unto me; vadasi--You tell; kesava--O Krsna; na--never; hi--certainly;
te--Your; bhagavan--O Personality of Godhead; vyaktim--revelation;
viduh--can know; devah--the demigods; na--nor; danavah--the demons.

TRANSLATION

O Krsna, I totally accept as truth all that You have told me. Neither
the gods nor demons, O Lord, know Thy personality.

PURPORT

Arjuna herein confirms that persons of faithless and demonic nature
cannot understand Krsna. He is not even known by the demigods, so what
to speak of the so-called scholars of this modern world? By the grace
of the Supreme Lord, Arjuna has understood that the Supreme Truth is
Krsna and that He is the perfect one. One should therefore follow the
path of Arjuna. He received the authority of Bhagavad-gita. As
described in the Fourth Chapter, the parampara system of disciplic
succession for the understanding of Bhagavad-gita was lost, and
therefore Krsna reestablished that disciplic succession with Arjuna
because He considered Arjuna His intimate friend and a great devotee.
Therefore, as stated in our Introduction to Gitopanisad, Bhagavad-gita
should be understood in the parampara system. When the parampara system
was lost, Arjuna was again selected to rejuvenate it. The acceptance of
Arjuna of all that Krsna says should be emulated; then we can
understand the essence of Bhagavad-gita, and then only can we
understand that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 15

svayam evatmanatmanam
vettha tvam purusottama
bhuta-bhavana bhutesa
deva-deva jagat-pate

SYNONYMS

svayam--personality; eva--certainly; atmana--by Yourself; atmanam--
Yourself; vettha--know; tvam--You; purusa-uttama--O greatest of all
persons; bhuta-bhavana--O origin of everything; bhuta-isa--O Lord of



everything; deva-deva--O Lord of all demigods; jagat-pate--O Lord of
the entire universe.

TRANSLATION

Indeed, You alone know Yourself by Your own potencies, O origin of all,
Lord of all beings, God of gods, O Supreme Person, Lord of the
universe!

PURPORT

The Supreme Lord Krsna can be known by persons who are in a
relationship with Him through the discharge of devotional service, like
Arjuna and his followers. Persons of demonic or atheistic mentality
cannot know Krsna. Mental speculation that leads one away from the
Supreme Lord is a serious sin, and one who does not know Krsna should
not try to comment on Bhagavad-gita. Bhagavad-gita is the statement of
Krsna, and since it is the science of Krsna, it should be understood
from Krsna as Arjuna understood it. It should not be received from
atheistic persons.
The Supreme Truth is realized in three aspects: as impersonal Brahman,
localized Paramatma and at last as the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
So at the last stage of understanding the Absolute Truth, one comes to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. A liberated man and even a common
man may realize impersonal Brahman or localized Paramatma, yet they may
not understand God's personality from the verses of Bhagavad-gita,
which are being spoken by this person, Krsna. Sometimes the
impersonalists accept Krsna as Bhagavan, or they accept His authority.
Yet many liberated persons cannot understand Krsna as Purusottama, the
Supreme Person, the father of all living entities. Therefore Arjuna
addresses Him as Purusottama. And if one comes to know Him as the
father of all the living entities, still one may not know Him as the
supreme controller; therefore He is addressed here as Bhutesa, the
supreme controller of everyone. And even if one knows Krsna as the
supreme controller of all living entities, still one may not know that
He is the origin of all the demigods; therefore He is addressed herein
as Devadeva, the worshipful God of all demigods. And even if one knows
Him as the worshipful God of all demigods, one may not know that He is
the supreme proprietor of everything; therefore He is addressed as
Jagatpati. Thus the truth about Krsna is established in this verse by
the realization of Arjuna, and we should follow in the footsteps of
Arjuna to understand Krsna as He is.

TEXT 16

vaktum arhasy asesena
divya hy atma-vibhutayah
yabhir vibhutibhir lokan
imams tvam vyapya tisthasi

SYNONYMS

vaktum--to say; arhasi--deserve; asesena--in detail; divyah--divine;
hi--certainly; atma--Yourself; vibhutayah--opulences; yabhih--by which;
vibhutibhih--opulences; lokan--all the planets; iman--these; tvam--You;
vyapya--pervading; tisthasi--remain.

TRANSLATION



Please tell me in detail of Your divine powers by which You pervade all
these worlds and abide in them.

PURPORT

In this verse it appears that Arjuna is already satisfied with his
understanding of the Supreme Lord Krsna. By Krsna's grace, Arjuna has
personal experience, intelligence and knowledge and whatever else a
person may have through all these agencies, and he has understood Krsna
as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For him there is no doubt, yet
he is asking Krsna to explain His all-pervading nature so that in the
future people will understand, especially the impersonalists, how He
exists in His all-pervading aspect through His different energies. One
should know that this is being asked by Arjuna on behalf of the common
people.

TEXT 17

katham vidyam aham yogims
tvam sada paricintayan
kesu kesu ca bhavesu
cintyo 'si bhagavan maya

SYNONYMS

katham--how; vidyam aham--shall I know; yogin--O supreme mystic; tvam--
You; sada--always; paricintayan--thinking; kesu--in which; kesu--in
which; ca--also; bhavesu--nature; cintyah asi--You are remembered;
bhagavan--O Supreme; maya--by me.

TRANSLATION

How shall I meditate on You? In what various forms are You to be
remembered, O Blessed Lord?

PURPORT

As it is stated in the previous chapter, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is covered by His yoga-maya. Only surrendered souls and
devotees can see Him. Now Arjuna is convinced that His friend, Krsna,
is the Supreme Godhead, but he wants to know the general process by
which the all-pervading Lord can be understood by the common man. No
common men, including the demons and atheists, can know Krsna because
He is guarded by His yoga-maya energy. Again, these questions are asked
by Arjuna for their benefit. The superior devotee is not only concerned
for his own understanding, but for the understanding of all mankind.
Out of his mercy, because he is a Vaisnava, a devotee, Arjuna is
opening the understanding for the common man as far as the all-
pervasiveness of the Supreme is concerned. He addresses Krsna
specifically as yogin because Sri Krsna is the master of the yoga-maya
energy by which He is covered and uncovered to the common man. The
common man who has no love for Krsna cannot always think of Krsna;
therefore he has to think materially. Arjuna is considering the mode of
thinking of the materialistic persons of this world. Because
materialists cannot understand Krsna spiritually, they are advised to
concentrate the mind on physical things and try to see how Krsna is
manifested by physical representations.



TEXT 18

vistarenatmano yogam
vibhutim ca janardana
bhuyah kathaya trptir hi
srnvato nasti me 'mrtam

SYNONYMS

vistarena--in description; atmanah--of Yourself; yogam--mystic power;
vibhutim--opulences; ca--also; jana-ardana--O killer of the atheists;
bhuyah--again; kathaya--describe; trptih--satisfaction; hi--certainly;
srnvatah--hearing; na asti--there is not; me--my; amrtam--nectar.

TRANSLATION

Tell me again in detail, O Janardana [Krsna], of Your mighty potencies
and glories, for I never tire of hearing Your ambrosial words.

PURPORT

A similar statement was made to Suta Gosvami by the rsis of
Naimisaranya, headed by Saunaka. That statement is:

vayam tu na vitrpyama
uttama-sloka-vikrame
yac chrnvatam rasa-jnanam
svadu svadu pade pade

"One can never be satiated even though one continuously hears the
transcendental pastimes of Krsna, who is glorified by Vedic hymns.
Those who have entered into a transcendental relationship with Krsna
relish in every step descriptions of the pastimes of the Lord."
(Srimad-Bhagavatam 1.1.19) Thus Arjuna is interested to hear about
Krsna, specifically how He remains as the all-pervading Supreme Lord.
Now as far as amrtam, nectar, is concerned, any narration or statement
concerning Krsna is just like nectar. And this nectar can be perceived
by practical experience. Modern stories, fiction and histories are
different from the transcendental pastimes of the Lord in that one will
tire of hearing mundane stories, but one never tires of hearing about
Krsna. It is for this reason only that the history of the whole
universe is replete with references to the pastimes of the incarnations
of Godhead. For instance, the Puranas are histories of bygone ages that
relate the pastimes of the various incarnations of the Lord. In this
way the reading matter remains forever fresh, despite repeated
readings.

TEXT 19

sri-bhagavan uvaca
hanta te kathayisyami
divya hy atma-vibhutayah
pradhanyatah kuru-srestha
nasty anto vistarasya me

SYNONYMS



sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; hanta--
yes; te--unto you; kathayisyami--I shall speak; divyah--divine; hi--
certainly; atma-vibhutayah--personal opulences; pradhanyatah--
principally; kuru-srestha--O best of the Kurus; na asti--there is no;
antah--limit; vistarasya--to the extent; me--My.

TRANSLATION

The Blessed Lord said: Yes, I will tell you of My splendorous
manifestations, but only of those which are prominent, O Arjuna, for My
opulence is limitless.

PURPORT

It is not possible to comprehend the greatness of Krsna and His
opulences. The senses of the individual soul are imperfect and do not
permit him to understand the totality of Krsna's affairs. Still the
devotees try to understand Krsna, but not on the principle that they
will be able to understand Krsna fully at any specific time or in any
state of life. Rather, the very topics of Krsna are so relishable that
they appear to them as nectar. Thus they enjoy them. In discussing
Krsna's opulences and His diverse energies, the pure devotees take
transcendental pleasure. Therefore they want to hear and discuss them.
Krsna knows that living entities do not understand the extent of His
opulences; He therefore agrees to state only the principal
manifestations of His different energies. The word pradhanyatah
(principal) is very important because we can understand only a few of
the principal details of the Supreme Lord, for His features are
unlimited. It is not possible to understand them all. And vibhuti, as
used in this verse, refers to the opulences by which He controls the
whole manifestation. In the Amara-kosa dictionary it is stated that
vibhuti indicates an exceptional opulence.
The impersonalist or the pantheist cannot understand the exceptional
opulences of the Supreme Lord nor the manifestations of His divine
energy. Both in the material world and in the spiritual world His
energies are distributed in every variety of manifestation. Now Krsna
is describing what can be directly perceived by the common man; thus
part of His variegated energy is described in this way.

TEXT 20

aham atma gudakesa
sarva-bhutasaya-sthitah
aham adis ca madhyam ca
bhutanam anta eva ca

SYNONYMS

aham--I; atma--soul; gudakesa--O Arjuna; sarva-bhuta--all living
entities; asaya-sthitah--situated within; aham--I am; adih--origin; ca-
-also; madhyam--middle; ca--also; bhutanam--all living entities; antah-
-end; eva--certainly; ca--and.

TRANSLATION

I am the Self, O Gudakesa, seated in the hearts of all creatures. I am
the beginning, the middle and the end of all beings.



PURPORT

In this verse Arjuna is addressed as Gudakesa, which means one who has
conquered the darkness of sleep. For those who are sleeping in the
darkness of ignorance it is not possible to understand how the Supreme
Personality of Godhead manifests Himself in the material and spiritual
worlds. Thus this address by Krsna to Arjuna is significant. Because
Arjuna is above such darkness, the Personality of Godhead agrees to
describe His various opulences.
Krsna first informs Arjuna that He is the Self or soul of the entire
cosmic manifestation by dint of His primary expansion. Before the
material creation, the Supreme Lord, by His plenary expansion, accepts
the purusa incarnations, and from Him everything begins. Therefore He
is atma, the soul of the mahat-tattva, the universal elements. The
total material energy is not the cause of the creation but actually the
Maha-Visnu enters into the mahat-tattva, the total material energy. He
is the soul. When Maha-Visnu enters into the manifested universes, He
again manifests Himself as the Supersoul in each and every entity. We
have experience that the personal body of the living entity exists due
to the presence of the spiritual spark. Without the existence of the
spiritual spark, the body cannot develop. Similarly, the material
manifestation cannot develop unless the Supreme Soul of Krsna enters.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is existing as the Supersoul in all
manifested universes. A description of the three purusa-avataras is
given in Srimad-Bhagavatam: "The Supreme Personality of Godhead
manifests three features, as Karanodakasayi Visnu, Garbhodakasayi Visnu
and Ksirodakasayi Visnu, in this material manifestation." The Supreme
Lord, Krsna, the cause of all causes, lies down in the cosmic ocean as
Maha-Visnu or Karanodakasayi Visnu, and therefore Krsna is the
beginning of this universe, the maintainer of the universal
manifestation, and the end of all the energy.

TEXT 21

adityanam aham visnur
jyotisam ravir amsuman
maricir marutam asmi
naksatranam aham sasi

SYNONYMS

adityanam--of the Adityas; aham--I am; visnuh--the Supreme Lord;
jyotisam--of all luminaries; ravih--the sun; amsu-man--radiant;
maricih--Marici; marutam--of the Maruts; asmi--I am; naksatranam--of
stars; aham--I am; sasi--the moon.

TRANSLATION

Of the Adityas I am Visnu, of lights I am the radiant sun, I am Marici
of the Maruts, and among the stars I am the moon.

PURPORT

There are twelve Adityas, of which Krsna is the principal. And among
all the luminaries twinkling in the sky, the sun is the chief, and in
the Brahma-samhita the sun is accepted as the glowing effulgence of the
Supreme Lord and is considered to be one of His eyes. Marici is the



controlling deity of of the heavenly spaces. Among the stars, the moon
is the most prominent at night, and thus the moon represents Krsna.
TEXT 22

vedanam sama-vedo 'smi
devanam asmi vasavah
indriyanam manas casmi
bhutanam asmi cetana

SYNONYMS

vedanam--of all the Vedas; sama-vedah--the Sama Veda; asmi--I am;
devanam--of all the demigods; asmi--I am; vasavah--heavenly king;
indriyanam--of all the senses; manah--the mind; ca--also; asmi--I am;
bhutanam--of all living entities; asmi--I am; cetana--the living force.

TRANSLATION

Of the Vedas I am the Sama Veda; of the demigods I am Indra; of the
senses I am the mind, and in living beings I am the living force
[knowledge].

PURPORT

The difference between matter and spirit is that matter has no
consciousness like the living entity; therefore this consciousness is
supreme and eternal. Consciousness cannot be produced by a combination
of matter.

TEXT 23

rudranam sankaras casmi
vitteso yaksa-raksasam
vasunam pavakas casmi
meruh sikharinam aham

SYNONYMS

rudranam--of all the Rudras; sankarah--Lord Siva; ca--also; asmi--I am;
vitta-isah--the lord of the treasury of the demigods; yaksa-raksasam--
of the Yaksas and Raksasas; vasunam--of the Vasus; pavakah--fire; ca--
also; asmi--I am; meruh--Meru; sikharinam--of all mountains; aham--I
am.

TRANSLATION

Of all the Rudras I am Lord Siva; of the Yaksas and Raksasas I am the
Lord of wealth [Kuvera]; of the Vasus I am fire [Agni], and of
mountains I am Meru.

PURPORT

There are eleven Rudras, of whom Sankara, Lord Siva, is predominant. He
is the incarnation of the Supreme Lord in charge of the mode of
ignorance in the universe. Among the demigods Kuvera is the chief
treasurer, and he is a representation of the Supreme Lord. Meru is a
mountain famed for its rich natural resources.



TEXT 24

purodhasam ca mukhyam mam
viddhi partha brhaspatim
senaninam aham skandah
sarasam asmi sagarah

SYNONYMS

purodhasam--of all priests; ca--also; mukhyam--chief; mam--Me; viddhi--
understand; partha--O son of Prtha; brhaspatim--Brhaspati; senaninam--
of all commanders; aham--I am; skandah--Kartikeya; sarasam--of all
reservoirs of water; asmi--I am; sagarah--the ocean.

TRANSLATION

Of priests, O Arjuna, know Me to be the chief, Brhaspati, the lord of
devotion. Of generals I am Skanda, the lord of war; and of bodies of
water I am the ocean.

PURPORT

Indra is the chief demigod of the heavenly planets and is known as the
king of the heavens. The planet in which he reigns is called Indraloka.
Brhaspati is Indra's priest, and since Indra is the chief of all kings,
Brhaspati is the chief of all priests. And as Indra is the chief of all
kings, similarly Skanda the son of Parvati and Lord Siva, is the chief
of all military commanders. And of all bodies of water, the ocean is
the greatest. These representations of Krsna only give hints of His
greatness.

TEXT 25

maharsinam bhrgur aham
giram asmy ekam aksaram
yajnanam japa-yajno 'smi
sthavaranam himalayah

SYNONYMS

maha-rsinam--among the great sages; bhrguh--Bhrgu; aham--I am; giram--
of vibrations; asmi--I am; ekam aksaram--pranava; yajnanam--of
sacrifices; japa-yajnah--chanting; asmi--I am; sthavaranam--of
immovable things; himalayah--the Himalayan mountains.

TRANSLATION

Of the great sages I am Bhrgu; of vibrations I am the transcendental
om. Of sacrifices I am the chanting of the holy names [japa], and of
immovable things I am the Himalayas.

PURPORT

Brahma, the first living creature within the universe, created several
sons for the propagation of various kinds of species. The most powerful
of his sons is Bhrgu, who is also the greatest sage. Of all the
transcendental vibrations, the om (omkara) represents the Supreme. Of
all sacrifices, the chanting of Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna,



Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare is the purest
representation of Krsna. Sometimes animal sacrifices are recommended,
but in the sacrifice of Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, there is no question of
violence. It is the simplest and the purest. Whatever is sublime in the
worlds is a representation of Krsna. Therefore the Himalayas, the
greatest mountains in the world, also represent Him. The mountain named
Meru was mentioned in a previous verse, but Meru is sometimes movable,
whereas the Himalayas are never movable. Thus the Himalayas are greater
than Meru.

TEXT 26

asvatthah sarva-vrksanam
devarsinam ca naradah
gandharvanam citrarathah
siddhanam kapilo munih

SYNONYMS

asvatthah--the banyan tree; sarva-vrksanam--of all trees; deva-rsinam--
of all the sages amongst the demigods; ca--and; naradah--Narada;
gandharvanam--the citizens of the Gandharva planet; citrarathah--
Citraratha; siddhanam--of all those who are perfected; kapilah munih--
Kapila Muni.

TRANSLATION

Of all trees I am the holy fig tree, and among sages and demigods I am
Narada. Of singers of the gods [Gandharvas] I am Citraratha, and among
perfected beings I am the sage Kapila.

PURPORT

The fig tree (asvattha) is one of the most beautiful and highest trees,
and people in India often worship it as one of their daily morning
rituals. Amongst the demigods they also worship Narada, who is
considered the greatest devotee in the universe. Thus he is the
representation of Krsna as a devotee. The Gandharva planet is filled
with entities who sing beautifully, and among them the best singer is
Citraratha. Amongst the perpetually living entities, Kapila is
considered an incarnation of Krsna, and His philosophy is mentioned in
the Srimad-Bhagavatam. Later on another Kapila became famous, but his
philosophy was atheistic. Thus there is a gulf of difference between
them.

TEXT 27

uccaihsravasam asvanam
viddhi mam amrtodbhavam
airavatam gajendranam
naranam ca naradhipam

SYNONYMS

uccaihsravasam--Uccaihsrava; asvanam--among horses; viddhi--know; mam--
Me; amrta-udbhavam--produced from the churning of the ocean; airavatam-
-Airavata; gaja-indranam--of elephants; naranam--among human beings;
ca--and; nara-adhipam--the king.



TRANSLATION

Of horses know Me to be Uccaihsrava, who rose out of the ocean, born of
the elixir of immortality; of lordly elephants I am Airavata, and among
men I am the monarch.

PURPORT

The devotee demigods and the demons (asuras) once took a sea journey.
On this journey, nectar and poison were produced, and Lord Siva drank
the poison. From the nectar were produced many entities, of which there
was a horse named Uccaihsrava. Another animal produced from the nectar
was an elephant named Airavata. Because these two animals were produced
from nectar, they have special significance, and they are
representatives of Krsna.
Amongst the human beings the king is the representative of Krsna
because Krsna is the maintainer of the universe, and the kings, who are
appointed on account of their godly qualifications, are maintainers of
their kingdoms. Kings like Maharaja Yudhisthira, Maharaja Pariksit and
Lord Rama were all highly righteous kings who always thought of the
citizens' welfare. In Vedic literature, the king is considered to be
the representative of God. In this age, however, with the corruption of
the principles of religion, monarchy decayed and is now finally
abolished. It is to be understood that in the past, however, people
were more happy under righteous kings.

TEXT 28

ayudhanam aham vajram
dhenunam asmi kamadhuk
prajanas casmi kandarpah
sarpanam asmi vasukih

SYNONYMS

ayudhanam--of all weapons; aham--I am; vajram--the thunderbolt;
dhenunam--of cows; asmi--I am; kama-dhuk--the surabhi cows; prajanah--
for begetting children; ca--and; asmi--I am; kandarpah--Cupid;
sarpanam--of all snakes; asmi--I am; vasukih--Vasuki.

TRANSLATION

Of weapons I am the thunderbolt; among cows I am the surabhi, givers of
abundant milk. Of procreators I am Kandarpa, the god of love, and of
serpents I am Vasuki, the chief.

PURPORT

The thunderbolt, indeed a mighty weapon, represents Krsna's power. In
Krsnaloka in the spiritual sky there are cows which can be milked at
any time, and they give as much milk as one likes. Of course such cows
do not exist in this material world, but there is mention of them in
Krsnaloka. The Lord keeps many such cows, which are called surabhi. It
is stated that the Lord is engaged in herding the surabhi cows.
Kandarpa is the sex desire for presenting good sons; therefore Kandarpa
is the representative of Krsna. Sometimes sex is engaged in only for



sense gratification; such sex does not represent Krsna. But sex for the
generation of good children is called Kandarpa and represents Krsna.

TEXT 29

anantas casmi naganam
varuno yadasam aham
pitrnam aryama casmi
yamah samyamatam aham

SYNONYMS

anantah--Ananta; ca--also; asmi--I am; naganam--of all serpents;
varunah--the demigod controlling the water; yadasam--of all aquatics;
aham--I am; pitrnam--of the ancestors; aryama--Aryama; ca--also; asmi--
I am; yamah--the controller of death; samyamatam--of all regulators;
aham--I am.

TRANSLATION

Of the celestial Naga snakes I am Ananta; of the aquatic deities I am
Varuna. Of departed ancestors I am Aryama, and among the dispensers of
law I am Yama, lord of death.

PURPORT

Among the many celestial Naga serpents, Ananta is the greatest, as is
Varuna among the aquatics. They both represent Krsna. There is also a
planet of Pitas, ancestors, presided over by Aryama, who represents
Krsna. There are many living entities who give punishment to the
miscreants, and among them Yama is the chief. Yama is situated in a
planet near this earthly planet, and after death those who are very
sinful are taken there, and Yama arranges different kinds of
punishments for them.

TEXT 30

prahladas casmi daityanam
kalah kalayatam aham
mrganam ca mrgendro 'ham
vainateyas ca paksinam

SYNONYMS

prahladah--Prahlada; ca--also; asmi--I am; daityanam--of the demons;
kalah--time; kalayatam--of subduers; aham--I am; mrganam--of animals;
ca--and; mrga-indrah--the lion; aham--I am; vainateyah--Garuda; ca--
also; paksinam--of birds.

TRANSLATION

Among the Daitya demons I am the devoted Prahlada; among subduers I am
time; among beasts I am the lion, and among birds I am Garuda, the
feathered carrier of Visnu.

PURPORT



Diti and Aditi are two sisters. The sons of Aditi are called Adityas,
and the sons of Diti are called Daityas. All the Adityas are devotees
of the Lord, and all the Daityas are atheistic. Although Prahlada was
born in the family of the Daityas, he was a great devotee from his
childhood. Because of his devotional service and godly nature, he is
considered to be a representative of Krsna.
There are many subduing principles, but time wears down all things in
the material universe and so represents Krsna. Of the many animals, the
lion is the most powerful and ferocious, and of the million varieties
of birds, Garuda, the bearer of Lord Visnu, is the greatest.

TEXT 31

pavanah pavatam asmi
ramah sastra-bhrtam aham
jhasanam makaras casmi
srotasam asmi jahnavi

SYNONYMS

pavanah--the wind; pavatam--of all that purifies; asmi--I am; ramah--
Rama; sastra-bhrtam--of the carriers of weapons; aham--I am; jhasanam--
of all aquatics; makarah--shark; ca asmi--I am also; srotasam--of
flowing rivers; asmi--I am; jahnavi--the River Ganges.

TRANSLATION

Of purifiers I am the wind; of the wielders of weapons I am Rama; of
fishes I am the shark, and of flowing rivers I am the Ganges.

PURPORT

Of all the aquatics the shark is one of the biggest and is certainly
the most dangerous to man. Thus the shark represents Krsna. And of
rivers, the greatest in India is the Mother Ganges. Lord Ramacandra, of
the Ramayana, an incarnation of Krsna, is the mightest of warriors.

TEXT 32

sarganam adir antas ca
madhyam caivaham arjuna
adhyatma-vidya vidyanam
vadah pravadatam aham

SYNONYMS

sarganam--of all creations; adih--beginning; antah--end; ca--and;
madhyam--middle; ca--also; eva--certainly; aham--I am; arjuna--O
Arjuna; adhyatma-vidya--spiritual knowledge; vidyanam--of all
education; vadah--natural conclusion; pravadatam--of arguments; aham--I
am.

TRANSLATION

Of all creations I am the beginning and the end and also the middle, O
Arjuna. Of all sciences I am the spiritual science of the self, and
among logicians I am the conclusive truth.



PURPORT

Among created manifestations, the total material elements are first
created by Maha-Visnu and are annihilated by Lord Siva. Brahma is a
secondary creator. All these created elements are different
incarnations of the material qualities of the Supreme Lord; therefore
He is the beginning, the middle and the end of all creation.
Regarding the spiritual science of the self, there are many
literatures, such as the four Vedas, the Vedanta-sutra and the Puranas,
the Srimad Bhagavatam and the Gita. These are all representatives of
Krsna. Among logicians there are different stages of argument. The
presentation of evidence is called jalpa. The attempt to defeat one
another is called vitanda, and the final conclusion is called vada. The
conclusive truth, the end of all reasoning processes, is Krsna.

TEXT 33

aksaranam akaro 'smi
dvandvah samasikasya ca
aham evaksayah kalo
dhataham visvato-mukhah

SYNONYMS

aksaranam--of letters; akarah--the first; asmi--I am; dvandvah--dual;
samasikasya--compounds; ca--and; aham--I am; eva--certainly; aksayah--
eternal; kalah--time; dhata--creator; aham--I am; visvatah-mukhah--
Brahma.

TRANSLATION

Of letters I am the letter A, and among compound words I am the dual
compound. I am also inexhaustible time, and of creators I am Brahma,
whose manifold faces turn everywhere.

PURPORT

Akara, the first letter of the Sanskrit alphabet, is the beginning of
the Vedic literature. Without akara, nothing can be sounded; therefore
it is the beginning of sound. In Sanskrit there are also many compound
words, of which the dual word, like Rama-krsna, is called dvandva. For
instance, Rama and Krsna have the same rhythm, and therefore are called
dual.
Among all kinds of killers, time is the ultimate because time kills
everything. Time is the representative of Krsna because in due course
of time there will be a great fire and everything will be annihilated.
Among the creators and living entities, Brahma is the chief. The
various Brahma's exhibit four, eight, sixteen, etc., heads accordingly,
and they are the chief creators in their respective universes. The
Brahmas are representatives of Krsna.

TEXT 34

mrtyuh sarva-haras caham
udbhavas ca bhavisyatam
kirtih srir vak ca narinam
smrtir medha dhrtih ksama



SYNONYMS

mrtyuh--death; sarva-harah--all-devouring; ca--also; aham--I am;
udbhavah--generation; ca--also; bhavisyatam--of the future; kirtih--
fame; srih vak--beautiful speech; ca--also; narinam--of women; smrtih--
memory; medha--intelligence; dhrtih--faithfulness; ksama--patience.

TRANSLATION

I am all-devouring death, and I am the generator of all things yet to
be. Among women I am fame, fortune, speech, memory, intelligence,
faithfulness and patience.

PURPORT

As soon as a man is born, he dies at every moment. Thus death is
devouring every living entity at every moment, but the last stroke is
called death itself. That death is Krsna. All species of life undergo
six basic changes. They are born, they grow, they remain for some time,
they reproduce, they dwindle and finally they vanish. Of these changes,
the first is deliverance from the womb, and that is Krsna. The first
generation is the beginning of all future activities.
The seven opulences listed are considered to be feminine. If a woman
possesses all of them or some of them she becomes glorious. Sanskrit is
a perfect language and is therefore very glorious. After studying, if
one can remember the subject matter, he is gifted with a good memory,
or smrti. One need not read many books on different subject matters;
the ability to remember a few and quote them when necessary is another
opulence.

TEXT 35

brhat-sama tatha samnam
gayatri chandasam aham
masanam marga-sirso 'ham
rtunam kusumakarah

SYNONYMS

brhat-sama--the Brhat-sama; tatha--also; samnam--of the Sama Veda
songs; gayatri--the Gayatri hymns; chandasam--of all poetry; aham--I
am; masanam--of months; marga-sirsah--the month of November-December;
aham--I am; rtunam--of all seasons; kusuma-akarah--spring.

TRANSLATION

Of hymns I am the Brhat-sama sung to the Lord Indra, and of poetry I am
the Gayatri verse, sung daily by Brahmanas. Of months I am November and
December, and of seasons I am flower-bearing spring.

PURPORT

It has already been explained by the Lord that amongst all the Vedas,
the Sama Veda is rich with beautiful songs played by the various
demigods. One of these songs is the Brhat-sama, which has an exquisite
melody and is sung at midnight.
In Sanskrit there are definite rules that regulate poetry; rhyme and
meter are not written whimsically, as in much modern poetry. Amongst



the regulated poetry, the Gayatri mantra, which is chanted by the duly
qualified brahmanas, is the most prominent. The Gayatri mantra is
mentioned in the Srimad-Bhagavatam. Because the Gayatri mantra is
especially meant for God realization, it represents the Supreme Lord.
This mantra is meant for spiritually advanced people, and when one
attains success in chanting it, he can enter into the transcendental
position of the Lord. One must first acquire the qualities of the
perfectly situated person, the qualities of goodness according to the
laws of material nature, in order to chant the Gayatri mantra. The
Gayatri mantra is very important in Vedic civilization and is
considered to be the sound incarnation of Brahman. Brahma is its
initiator, and it is passed down from him in disciplic succession.
The months of November and December are considered the best of all
months because in India grains are collected from the fields at this
time, and the people become very happy. Of course spring is a season
universally liked because it is neither too hot nor too cold, and the
flowers and trees blossom and flourish. In spring there are also many
ceremonies commemorating Krsna's pastimes; therefore this is considered
to be the most joyful of all seasons, and it is the representative of
the Supreme Lord, Krsna.

TEXT 36

dyutam chalayatam asmi
tejas tejasvinam aham
jayo 'smi vyavasayo 'smi
sattvam sattvavatam aham

SYNONYMS

dyutam--gambling; chalayatam--of all cheats; asmi--I am; tejah--
splendid; tejasvinam--of everything splendid; aham--I am; jayah--
victory; asmi--I am; vyavasayah--adventure; asmi--I am; sattvam--
strength; sattva-vatam--of all the strong; aham--I am.

TRANSLATION

I am also the gambling of cheats, and of the splendid I am the
splendor. I am victory, I am adventure, and I am the strength of the
strong.

PURPORT

There are many kinds of cheaters all over the universe. Of all cheating
processes, gambling stands supreme and therefore represents Krsna. As
the Supreme, Krsna can be more deceitful than any mere man. If Krsna
chooses to deceive a person, no one can surpass Him in His deceit. His
greatness is not simply one-sided--it is all-sided.
Among the victorious, He is victory. He is the splendor of the
splendid. Among enterprising industrialists, He is the most
enterprising, the most industrious. Among adventurers, He is the most
adventurous, and among the strong He is the strongest. When Krsna was
present on earth, no one could surpass Him in strength. Even in His
childhood He lifted Govardhana Hill. No one can surpass Him in
cheating, no one can surpass Him in splendor, no one can surpass Him in
victory, no one can surpass Him in enterprise, and no one can surpass
Him in strength.



TEXT 37

vrsninam vasudevo 'smi
pandavanam dhananjayah
muninam apy aham vyasah
kavinam usana kavih

SYNONYMS

vrsninam--of the descendants of Vrsni; vasudevah--Krsna in Dvaraka;
asmi--I am; pandavanam--of the Pandavas; dhananjayah--Arjuna; muninam--
of the sages; api--also; aham--I am; vyasah--Vyasa, the compiler of all
Vedic literature; kavinam--of all great thinkers; usana--Usana; kavih--
the thinker.

TRANSLATION

Of the descendants of Vrsni I am Vasudeva, and of the Pandavas I am
Arjuna. Of the sages I am Vyasa, and among great thinkers I am Usana.

PURPORT

Krsna is the original Supreme Personality of Godhead, and Vasudeva is
the immediate expansion of Krsna. Both Lord Krsna and Baladeva appear
as the sons of Vasudeva. Amongst the sons of Pandu, Arjuna is famous
and valiant. Indeed, He is the best of men and therefore represents
Krsna. Among the munis, or learned men conversant in Vedic knowledge,
Vyasa is the greatest because he explained Vedic knowledge in many
different ways for the understanding of the common mass of people in
this Age of Kali. And Vyasa is also known as an incarnation of Krsna;
therefore Vyasa also represents Krsna. Kavis are those who are capable
of thinking thoroughly on any subject matter. Among the kavis, Usana
was the spiritual master of the demons; he was an extremely
intelligent, far-seeing, political and spiritual in every way. Thus
Usana is another representative of the opulence of Krsna.

TEXT 38

dando damayatam asmi
nitir asmi jigisatam
maunam caivasmi guhyanam
jnanam jnanavatam aham

SYNONYMS

dandah--punishment; damayatam--of all separation; asmi--I am; nitih--
morality; asmi--I am; jigisatam--of the victorious; maunam--silence;
ca--and; eva--also; asmi--I am; guhyanam--of secrets; jnanam--
knowledge; jnana-vatam--of the wise; aham--I am.

TRANSLATION

Among punishments I am the rod of chastisement, and of those who seek
victory I am morality. Of secret things I am silence, and of the wise I
am wisdom.

PURPORT



There are many suppressing agents, of which the most important are
those that cut down the miscreants. When miscreants are punished, the
rod of chastisement represents Krsna. Among those who are trying to be
victorious in some field of activity, the most victorious element is
morality. Among the confidential activities of hearing, thinking and
meditating, silence is most important because by silence one can make
progress very quickly. The wise man is he who can discriminate between
matter and spirit, between God's superior and inferior natures. Such
knowledge is Krsna Himself.

TEXT 39

yac capi sarva-bhutanam
bijam tad aham arjuna
na tad asti vina yat syan
maya bhutam caracaram

SYNONYMS

yat--whatever; ca--also; api--may be; sarva-bhutanam--of all creations;
bijam--the seed; tat--that; aham--I am; arjuna--O Arjuna; na--not; tat-
-that; asti--there is; vina--without; yat--that; syat--exists; maya--by
Me; bhutam--created; cara-acaram--moving and unmoving.

TRANSLATION

Furthermore, O Arjuna, I am the generating seed of all existences.
There is no being--moving or unmoving--that can exist without Me.

PURPORT

Everything has a cause, and that cause or seed of manifestation is
Krsna. Without Krsna's energy, nothing can exist; therefore He is
called omnipotent. Without His potency, neither the movable nor the
unmovable can exist. Whatever existence is not founded on the energy of
Krsna is called maya, that which is not.

TEXT 40

nanto 'sti mama divyanam
vibhutinam parantapa
esa tuddesatah prokto
vibhuter vistaro maya

SYNONYMS

na--nor; antah--a limit; asti--is there; mama--My; divyanam--divine;
vibhutinam--opulences; parantapa--O conqueror of the enemies; esah--all
this; tu--that; uddesatah--examples; proktah--spoken; vibhuteh--
opulences; vistarah--expanded; maya--by Me.

TRANSLATION

O mighty conqueror of enemies, there is no end to My divine
manifestations. What I have spoken to you is but a mere indication of
My infinite opulences.

PURPORT



As stated in the Vedic literature, although the opulences and energies
of the Supreme are understood in various ways, there is no limit to
such opulences; therefore not all the opulences and energies can be
explained. Simply a few examples are being described to Arjuna to
pacify his inquisitiveness.

TEXT 41

yad yad vibhutimat sattvam
srimad urjitam eva va
tat tad evavagaccha tvam
mama tejo-'msa-sambhavam

SYNONYMS

yat yat--whatever; vibhuti--opulences; mat--having; sattvam--existence;
sri-mat--beautiful; urjitam--glorious; eva--certainly; va--or; tat tat-
-all those; eva--certainly; avagaccha--you must know; tvam--you; mama--
My; tejah--splendor; amsa--partly; sambhavam--born of.

TRANSLATION

Know that all beautiful, glorious, and mighty creations spring from but
a spark of My splendor.

PURPORT

Any glorious or beautiful existence should be understood to be but a
fragmental manifestation of Krsna's opulence, whether it be in the
spiritual or material world. Anything extraordinarily opulent should be
considered to represent Krsna's opulence.

TEXT 42

atha va bahunaitena
kim jnatena tavarjuna
vistabhyaham idam krtsnam
ekamsena sthito jagat

SYNONYMS

atha va--or; bahuna--many; etena--by this kind; kim--what; jnatena--
knowing; tava--you; arjuna--O Arjuna; vistabhya--entire; aham--I; idam-
-this; krtsnam--of all manifestations; eka--one; amsena--part; sthitah-
-situated; jagat--in the universe.

TRANSLATION

But what need is there, Arjuna, for all this detailed knowledge? With a
single fragment of Myself I pervade and support this entire universe.

PURPORT

The Supreme Lord is represented throughout the entire material
universes by His entering into all things as the Supersoul. The Lord
here tells Arjuna that there is no point in understanding how things
exist in their separate opulence and grandeur. He should know that all



things are existing due to Krsna's entering them as Supersoul. From
Brahma, the most gigantic entity, on down to the smallest ant, all are
existing because the Lord has entered each and all and is sustaining
them.
Worship of demigods is discouraged herein because even the greatest
demigods like Brahma and Siva only represent part of the opulence of
the Supreme Lord. He is the origin of everyone born, and no one is
greater than Him. He is asamaurdhva, which means that no one is
superior to Him and that no one is equal to Him. In the Padma Purana it
is said that one who considers the Supreme Lord Krsna in the same
category with demigods--be they even Brahma or Siva--becomes at once an
atheist. If, however, one thoroughly studies the different descriptions
of the opulences and expansions of Krsna's energy, then one can
understand without any doubt the position of Lord Sri Krsna and can fix
his mind in the worship of Krsna without deviation. The Lord is all-
pervading by the expansion of His partial representation, the
Supersoul, who enters into everything that is. Pure devotees,
therefore, concentrate their minds in Krsna consciousness in full
devotional service; therefore they are always situated in the
transcendental position. Devotional service and worship of Krsna are
very clearly indicated in this chapter in verses eight through eleven.
That is the way of pure devotional service. How one can attain the
highest devotional perfection of association with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead has been thoroughly explained in this chapter.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Tenth Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of the Opulence of the Absolute.

Chapter 11
The Universal Form

TEXT 1

arjuna uvaca
mad-anugrahaya paramam
guhyam adhyatma-samjnitam
yat tvayoktam vacas tena
moho 'yam vigato mama

SYNONYMS

arjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; mat-anugrahaya--just show me favor;
paramam--supreme; guhyam--confidential; adhyatma--spiritual; samjnitam-
-in the matter of; yat--what; tvaya--by You; uktam--said; vacah--words;
tena--by that; mohah--illusion; ayam--this; vigatah--is educated; mama-
-my.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: I have heard Your instruction on confidential spiritual
matters which You have so kindly delivered unto me, and my illusion is
now dispelled.

PURPORT

This chapter reveals Krsna as the cause of all causes. He is even the
cause of the Maha-Visnu, and from Him the material universes emanate.



Krsna is not an incarnation; He is the source of all incarnations. That
has been completely explained in the last chapter.
Now, as far as Arjuna is concerned, he says that his illusion is over.
This means that Arjuna no longer thinks of Krsna as a mere human being,
as a friend of his, but as the source of everything. Arjuna is very
enlightened and is glad that he has a great friend like Krsna, but now
he is thinking that although he may accept Krsna as the source of
everything, others may not. So in order to establish Krsna's divinity
for all, he is requesting Krsna in this chapter to show His universal
form. Actually when one sees the universal form of Krsna one becomes
frightened, like Arjuna, but Krsna is so kind that after showing it He
converts Himself again into His original form. Arjuna agrees to what
Krsna has said several times. Krsna is speaking to him just for his
benefit, and Arjuna acknowledges that all this is happening to him by
Krsna's grace. He is now convinced that Krsna is the cause of all
causes and is present in everyone's heart as the Supersoul.

TEXT 2

bhavapyayau hi bhutanam
srutau vistaraso maya
tvattah kamala-patraksa
mahatmyam api cavyayam

SYNONYMS

bhava--appearance; apyayau--disappearance; hi--certainly; bhutanam--of
all living entities; srutau--have heard; vistarasah--detail; maya--by
me; tvattah--from You; kamala-patra-aksa--O lotus-eyed one; mahatmyam--
glories; api--also; ca--and; avyayam--inexhaustible.

TRANSLATION

O lotus-eyed one, I have heard from You in detail about the appearance
and disappearance of every living entity, as realized through Your
inexhaustible glories.

PURPORT

Arjuna addresses Lord Krsna as "lotus-eyed" (Krsna's eyes appear just
like the petals of a lotus flower) out of his joy, for Krsna has
assured him, in the last verse of the previous chapter, that He
sustains the entire universe with just a fragment of Himself. He is the
source of everything in this material manifestation, and Arjuna has
heard of this from the Lord in detail. Arjuna further knows that in
spite of His being the source of all appearances and disappearances, He
is aloof from them. His personality is not lost, although He is all-
pervading. That is the inconceivable opulence of Krsna which Arjuna
admits that he has thoroughly understood.

TEXT 3

evam etad yathattha tvam
atmanam paramesvara
drastum icchami te rupam
aisvaram purusottama

SYNONYMS



evam--that; etat--this; yatha--as it is; attha--have spoken; tvam--You;
atmanam--the soul; parama-isvara--the Supreme Lord; drastum--to see;
icchami--I wish; te--You; rupam--form; aisvaram--divine; purusa-uttama-
-O best of personalities.

TRANSLATION

O greatest of all personalities, O supreme form, though I see here
before me Your actual position, I wish to see how You have entered into
this cosmic manifestation. I want to see that form of Yours.

PURPORT

The Lord said that because He entered into the material universe by His
personal representation, the cosmic manifestation has been made
possible and is going on. Now as far as Arjuna is concerned, he is
inspired by the statements of Krsna, but in order to convince others in
the future who may think that Krsna is an ordinary person, he desires
to see Him actually in His universal form, to see how He is acting from
within the universe, although He is apart from it. Arjuna's asking the
Lord's permission is also significant. Since the Lord is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, He is present within Arjuna himself; therefore
He knows the desire of Arjuna, and He can understand that Arjuna has no
special desire to see Him in His universal form, for he is completely
satisfied to see Him in His personal form of Krsna. But He can
understand also that Arjuna wants to see the universal form to convince
others. He did not have any personal desire for confirmation. Krsna
also understands that Arjuna wants to see the universal form to set a
criterion, for in the future there would be so many imposters who would
pose themselves as incarnations of God. The people, therefore, should
be careful; one who claims to be Krsna should be prepared to show his
universal form to confirm his claim to the people.

TEXT 4

manyase yadi tac chakyam
maya drastum iti prabho
yogesvara tato me tvam
darsayatmanam avyayam

SYNONYMS

manyase--if You think; yadi--if; tat--that; sakyam--able to see; maya--
by me; drastum--to see; iti--thus; prabho--O Lord; yoga-isvara--O Lord
of all mystic power; tatah--then; me--unto me; tvam--You; darsaya--
show; atmanam--Yourself; avyayam--eternal.

TRANSLATION

If You think that I am able to behold Your cosmic form, O my Lord, O
master of all mystic power, then kindly show me that universal Self.

PURPORT

It is said that one can neither see, hear, understand nor perceive the
Supreme Lord, Krsna, by the material senses. But if one is engaged in
loving transcendental service to the Lord from the beginning, then one



can see the Lord by revelation. Every living entity is only a spiritual
spark; therefore it is not possible to see or to understand the Supreme
Lord. Arjuna, as a devotee, does not depend on his speculative
strength; rather, he admits his limitations as a living entity and
acknowledges Krsna's inestimable position. Arjuna could understand that
for a living entity it is not possible to understand the unlimited
infinite. If the infinite reveals Himself, then it is possible to
understand the nature of the infinite by the grace of the infinite. The
word yogesvara is also very significant here because the Lord has
inconceivable power. If He likes, He can reveal Himself by His grace,
although He is unlimited. Therefore Arjuna pleads for the inconceivable
grace of Krsna. He does not give Krsna orders. Krsna is not obliged to
reveal Himself to anyone unless one surrenders fully in Krsna
consciousness and engages in devotional service. Thus it is not
possible for persons who depend on the strength of their mental
speculations to see Krsna.

TEXT 5

sri-bhagavan uvaca
pasya me partha rupani
sataso 'tha sahasrasah
nana-vidhani divyani
nana-varnakrtini ca

SYNONYMS

sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; pasya--
just see; me--Mine; partha--O son of Prtha; rupani--forms; satasah--
hundreds; atha--also; sahasrasah--thousands; nana-vidhani--variegated;
divyani--divine; nana--variegated; varna--colors; akrtini--forms; ca--
also.

TRANSLATION

The Blessed Lord said: My dear Arjuna, O son of Prtha, behold now My
opulences, hundreds of thousands of varied divine forms, multicolored
like the sea.

PURPORT

Arjuna wanted to see Krsna in His universal form, which, although a
transcendental form, is just manifested for the cosmic manifestation
and is therefore subject to the temporary time of this material nature.
As the material nature is manifested and not manifested, similarly this
universal form of Krsna is manifested and nonmanifested. It is not
eternally situated in the spiritual sky like Krsna's other forms. As
far as a devotee is concerned, he is not eager to see the universal
form, but because Arjuna wanted to see Krsna in this way, Krsna reveals
this form. This universal form is not possible to be seen by any
ordinary man. Krsna must give one the power to see it.

TEXT 6

pasyadityan vasun rudran
asvinau marutas tatha
bahuny adrsta-purvani
pasyascaryani bharata



SYNONYMS

pasya--see; adityan--the twelve sons of Aditi; vasun--the eight Vasus;
rudran--the eleven forms of Rudra; asvinau--the two Asvinis; marutah--
the forty-nine Maruts (demigods of the wind); tatha--also; bahuni--
many; adrsta--that you have not head or seen; purvani--before; pasya--
there see; ascaryani--all the wonderful; bharata--O best of the
Bharatas.

TRANSLATION

O best of the Bharatas, see here the different manifestations of
Adityas, Rudras, and all the demigods. Behold the many things which no
one has ever seen or heard before.

PURPORT

Even though Arjuna was a personal friend of Krsna and the most advanced
of learned men, it was still not possible for him to know everything
about Krsna. Here it is stated that humans have neither heard nor known
of all these forms and manifestations. Now Krsna reveals these
wonderful forms.

TEXT 7

ihaika-stham jagat krtsnam
pasyadya sa-caracaram
mama dehe gudakesa
yac canyad drastum icchasi

SYNONYMS

iha--in this; eka-stham--in one; jagat--the universe; krtsnam--
completely; pasya--see; adya--immediately; sa--with; cara--moving;
acaram--not moving; mama--My; dehe--in this body; gudakesa--O Arjuna;
yat--that; ca--also; anyat--other; drastum--to see; icchasi--you like.

TRANSLATION

Whatever you wish to see can be seen all at once in this body. This
universal form can show you all that you now desire, as well as
whatever you may desire in the future. Everything is here completely.

PURPORT

No one can see the entire universe sitting in one place. Even the most
advanced scientist cannot see what is going on in other parts of the
universe. But a devotee like Arjuna can see everything that exists in
any part of the universe. Krsna gives him the power to see anything he
wants to see, past, present and future. Thus by the mercy of Krsna,
Arjuna is able to see everything.

TEXT 8

na tu mam sakyase drastum
anenaiva sva-caksusa
divyam dadami te caksuh



pasya me yogam aisvaram

SYNONYMS

na--never; tu--but; mam--Me; sakyase--able; drastum--to see; anena--by
this; eva--certainly; sva-caksusa--with your own eyes; divyam--divine;
dadami--I give; te--you; caksuh--eyes; pasya--see; me--My; yogam
aisvaram--inconceivable mystic power.

TRANSLATION

But you cannot see Me with your present eyes. Therefore I give you
divine eyes by which you can behold My mystic opulence!

PURPORT

A pure devotee does not like to see Krsna in any form except His form
with two hands; a devotee must see His universal form by His grace, not
with the mind but with spiritual eyes. To see the universal form of
Krsna, Arjuna is told not to change his mind but his vision. The
universal form of Krsna is not very important; that will be clear in
the verses. Yet because Arjuna wanted to see it, the Lord gives him the
particular vision required to see that universal form.
Devotees who are correctly situated in a transcendental relationship
with Krsna are attracted by loving features, not by a godless display
of opulences. The playmates of Krsna, the friends of Krsna and the
parents of Krsna never want Krsna to show His opulences. They are so
immersed in pure love that they do not even know that Krsna is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. In their loving exchange they forget
that Krsna is the Supreme Lord. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is stated
that the boys who play with Krsna are all highly pious souls, and after
many, many births they are able to play with Krsna. Such boys do not
know that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. They take Him as
a personal friend. The Supreme Person is considered the impersonal
Brahman by great sages, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead by the
devotees, and as a product of this material nature by ordinary men. The
fact is that the devotee is not concerned to see the visva-rupa, the
universal form, but Arjuna wanted to see it to substantiate Krsna's
statement so that in the future people could understand that Krsna not
only theoretically or philosophically presented Himself as the Supreme
but actually presented Himself as such to Arjuna. Arjuna must confirm
this because Arjuna is the beginning of the parampara system. Those who
are actually interested to understanding the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Krsna, and who follow in the footsteps of Arjuna should
understand that Krsna not only theoretically presented Himself as the
Supreme, but actually revealed Himself as the Supreme.
The Lord gave Arjuna the necessary power to see His universal form
because He knew that Arjuna did not particularly want to see it, as we
have already explained.

TEXT 9

sanjaya uvaca
evam uktva tato rajan
maha-yogesvaro harih
darsayam asa parthaya
paramam rupam aisvaram



SYNONYMS

sanjayah uvaca--Sanjaya said; evam--thus; uktva--saying; tatah--
thereafter; rajan--O King; maha-yoga-isvarah--the most powerful mystic;
harih--the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna; darsayam asa--showed;
parthaya--unto Arjuna; paramam--divine; rupam--universal form;
aisvaram--opulences.

TRANSLATION

Sanjaya said: O King, speaking thus, the Supreme, the Lord of all
mystic power, the Personality of Godhead, displayed His universal form
to Arjuna.

TEXTS 10-11

aneka-vaktra-nayanam
anekadbhuta-darsanam
aneka-divyabharanam
divyanekodyatayudham

divya-malyambara-dharam
divya-gandhanulepanam
sarvascarya-mayam devam
anantam visvato-mukham

SYNONYMS

aneka--various; vaktra--mouths; nayanam--eyes; aneka--various; adbhuta-
-wonderful; darsanam--sights; aneka--many; divya--divine; abharanam--
ornaments; divya--divine; aneka--various; udyata--uplifted; ayudham--
weapons; divya--divine; malya--garlands; ambara dharam--covered with
the dresses; divya--divine; gandha--fragrance; anulepanam--smeared;
sarva--all; ascarya-mayam--wonderful; devam--shining; anantam--
unlimited; visvatah-mukham--all-pervading.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna saw in that universal form unlimited mouths and unlimited eyes.
It was all wondrous. The form was decorated with divine, dazzling
ornaments and arrayed in many garbs. He was garlanded gloriously, and
there were many scents smeared over His body. All was magnificent, all-
expanding, unlimited. This was seen by Arjuna.

PURPORT

These two verses indicate that there is no limit to the hands, mouths,
legs, etc., of the Lord. These manifestations are distributed
throughout the universe and are unlimited. By the grace of the Lord,
Arjuna could see them while sitting in one place. That is due to the
inconceivable potency of Krsna.

TEXT 12

divi surya-sahasrasya
bhaved yugapad utthita
yadi bhah sadrsi sa syad
bhasas tasya mahatmanah



SYNONYMS

divi--in the sky; surya--sun; sahasrasya--of many thousands; bhavet--
there were; yugapat--simultaneously; utthita--present; yadi--if; bhah--
light; sadrsi--like that; sa--that; syat--may be; bhasah--effulgence;
tasya--there is; maha-atmanah--of the great Lord.

TRANSLATION

If hundreds of thousands of suns rose up at once into the sky, they
might resemble the effulgence of the Supreme Person in that universal
form.

PURPORT

What Arjuna saw was indescribable, yet Sanjaya is trying to give a
mental picture of that great revelation to Dhrtarastra. Neither Sanjaya
nor Dhrtarastra was present, but Sanjaya, by the grace of Vyasa, could
see whatever happened. Thus he now compares the situation, as far as it
can be understood, to an imaginable phenomenon (i.e. thousands of
suns).

TEXT 13

tatraika-stham jagat krtsnam
pravibhaktam anekadha
apasyad deva-devasya
sarire pandavas tada

SYNONYMS

tatra--there; eka-stham--one place; jagat--universe; krtsnam--
completely; pravibhaktam--divided in; anekadha--many kinds; apasyat--
could see; deva-devasya--of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sarire-
-in the universal form; pandavah--Arjuna; tada--at that time.

TRANSLATION

At that time Arjuna could see in the universal form of the Lord the
unlimited expansions of the universe situated in one place although
divided into many, many thousands.

PURPORT

The word tatra (there) is very significant. It indicates that both
Arjuna and Krsna were sitting on the chariot when Arjuna saw the
universal form. Others on the battlefield could not see this form
because Krsna gave the vision only to Arjuna. Arjuna could see in the
body of Krsna many thousands of universes. As we learn from Vedic
scriptures, there are many universes and many planets. Some of them are
made of earth, some are made of gold, some are made of jewels, some are
very great, some are not so great, etc. Sitting on his chariot, Arjuna
could see all these universes. But no one could understand what was
going on between Arjuna and Krsna.

TEXT 14



tatah sa vismayavisto
hrsta-roma dhananjayah
pranamya sirasa devam
krtanjalir abhasata

SYNONYMS

tatah--thereafter; sah--he; vismaya-avistah--being overwhelmed with
wonder; hrsta-roma--with his bodily hairs standing on end due to his
great ecstasy; dhananjayah--Arjuna; pranamya--offering obeisances;
sirasa--with the head; devam--to the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
krta-anjalih--with folded hands; abhasata--began to say.

TRANSLATION

Then, bewildered and astonished, his hair standing on end, Arjuna began
to pray with folded hands, offering obeisances to the Supreme Lord.

PURPORT

Once the divine vision is revealed, the relationship between Krsna and
Arjuna changes immediately. Before, Krsna and Arjuna had a relationship
based on friendship, but here, after the revelation, Arjuna is offering
obeisances with great respect, and with folded hands he is praying to
Krsna. He is praising the universal form. Thus Arjuna's relationship
becomes one of wonder rather than friendship. Great devotees see Krsna
as the reservoir of all relationships. In the scriptures there are
twelve basic kinds of relationships mentioned, and all of them are
present in Krsna. It is said that He is the ocean of all the
relationships exchanged between two living entities, between the gods,
or between the Supreme Lord and His devotees.
It is said that Arjuna was inspired by the relationship of wonder, and
in that wonder, although he was by nature very sober, calm and quiet,
he became ecstatic, his hair stood up, and he began to offer his
obeisances unto the Supreme Lord with folded hands. He was not, of
course, afraid. He was affected by the wonders of the Supreme Lord. The
immediate context is wonder; his natural loving friendship was
overwhelmed by wonder, and thus he reacted in this way.

TEXT 15

arjuna uvaca
pasyami devams tava deva dehe
sarvams tatha bhuta-visesa-sanghan
brahmanam isam kamalasana-stham
rsims ca sarvan uragams ca divyan

SYNONYMS

arjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; pasyami--I see; devan--all the demigods;
tava--Your; deva--O Lord; dehe--in the body; sarvan--all; tatha--also;
bhuta--living entities; visesa-sanghan--specifically assembled;
brahmanam--Lord Brahma; isam--Lord Siva; kamala-asana-stham--sitting on
the lotus flower; rsin--great sages; ca--also; sarvan--all; uragan--
serpents; ca--also; divyan--divine.

TRANSLATION



Arjuna said: My dear Lord Krsna, I see assembled together in Your body
all the demigods and various other living entities. I see Brahma
sitting on the lotus flower as well as Lord Siva and many sages and
divine serpents.

PURPORT

Arjuna sees everything in the universe; therefore he sees Brahma, who
is the first creature in the universe, and the celestial serpent upon
which the Garbhodakasayi Visnu lies in the lower regions of the
universe. This snake bed is called Vasuki. There are also other snakes
known as Vasuki. Arjuna can see from the Garbhodakasayi Visnu up to the
topmost part of the universe on the lotus-flower planet where Brahma,
the first creature of the universe, resides. That means that from the
beginning to the end, everything could be seen by Arjuna sitting in one
place on his chariot. This was possible by the grace of the Supreme
Lord, Krsna.

TEXT 16

aneka-bahudara-vaktra-netram
pasyami tvam sarvato 'nanta-rupam
nantam na madhyam na punas tavadim
pasyami visvesvara visva-rupa

SYNONYMS

aneka--many; bahu--arms; udara--bellies; vaktra--mouths; netram--eyes;
pasyami--I see; tvam--unto You; sarvatah--from all sides; ananta-rupam-
-unlimited form; na antam--there is no end; na madhyam--there is no
middle; na punah--nor again; tava--Your; adim--beginning; pasyami--I
see; visva-isvara--O Lord of the universe; visva-rupa--in the form of
the universe.

TRANSLATION

O Lord of the universe, I see in Your universal body many, many forms--
bellies, mouths, eyes--expanded without limit. There is no end, there
is no beginning, and there is no middle to all this.

PURPORT

Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead and is unlimited; thus
through Him everything could be seen.

TEXT 17

kiritinam gadinam cakrinam ca
tejo-rasim sarvato diptimantam
pasyami tvam durniriksyam samantad
diptanalarka-dyutim aprameyam

SYNONYMS

kiritinam--with helmets; gadinam--with maces; cakrinam--with discs; ca-
-and; tejah-rasim--effulgence; sarvatah--all sides; dipti-mantam--
glowing; pasyami--I see; tvam--You; durniriksyam--difficult to see;



samantat--spreading; dipta-anala--blazing fire; arka--sun; dyutim--
sunshine; aprameyam--immeasurable.

TRANSLATION

Your form, adorned with various crowns, clubs and discs, is difficult
to see because of its glaring effulgence, which is fiery and
immeasurable like the sun.

TEXT 18

tvam aksaram paramam veditavyam
tvam asya visvasya param nidhanam
tvam avyayah sasvata-dharma-gopta
sanatanas tvam puruso mato me

SYNONYMS

tvam--You; aksaram--inexhaustible; paramam--supreme; veditavyam--to be
understood; tvam--You; asya--of this; visvasya--of the universe; param-
-supreme; nidhanam--basis; tvam--You are; avyayah--inexhaustible;
sasvata-dharma-gopta--maintainer of the eternal religion; sanatanah--
eternal; tvam--You; purusah--Supreme Personality; matah me--is my
opinion.

TRANSLATION

You are the supreme primal objective; You are the best in all the
universes; You are inexhaustible, and You are the oldest; You are the
maintainer of religion, the eternal Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 19

anadi-madhyantam ananta-viryam
ananta-bahum sasi-surya-netram
pasyami tvam dipta-hutasa-vaktram
sva-tejasa visvam idam tapantam

SYNONYMS

anadi--without beginning; madhya--without middle; antam--without end;
ananta--unlimited; viryam--glorious; ananta--unlimited; bahum--arms;
sasi--moon; surya--sun; netram--eyes; pasyami--I see; tvam--You; dipta-
-blazing; hutasa-vaktram--fire coming out of Your mouth; sva-tejasa--by
Your; visvam--this universe; idam--this; tapantam--heating.

TRANSLATION

You are the origin without beginning, middle or end. You have
numberless arms, and the sun and moon are among Your great unlimited
eyes. By Your own radiance You are heating this entire universe.

PURPORT

There is no limit to the extent of the six opulences of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Here and in many other places there is
repetition, but according to the scriptures, repetition of the glories
of Krsna is not a literary weakness. It is said that at a time of



bewilderment or wonder or of great ecstasy, statements are repeated
over and over. That is not a flaw.

TEXT 20

dyav a-prthivyor idam antaram hi
vyaptam tvayaikena disas ca sarvah
drstvadbhutam rupam ugram tavedam
loka-trayam pravyathitam mahatman

SYNONYMS

dyau--in outer space; a-prthivyoh--of the earth; idam--this; antaram--
in between; hi--certainly; vyaptam--pervaded; tvaya--by You; ekena--by
one; disah--directions; ca--and; sarvah--all; drstva--by seeing;
adbhutam--wonderful; rupam--form; ugram--terrible; tava--Your; idam--
this; loka--planetary system; trayam--three; pravyathitam--perturbed;
maha-atman--O great one.

TRANSLATION

Although You are one, You are spread throughout the sky and the planets
and all space between. O great one, as I behold this terrible form, I
see that all the planetary systems are perplexed.

PURPORT

Dyav a-prthivyoh (the space between heaven and earth) and loka-trayam
(the three worlds) are significant words in this verse because it
appears that not only Arjuna saw this universal form of the Lord, but
others in other planetary systems also saw it. The vision was not a
dream. All whom were spiritually awake with the divine vision saw it.

TEXT 21

ami hi tvam sura-sangha visanti
kecid bhitah pranjalayo grnanti
svastity uktva maharsi-siddha-sanghah
stuvanti tvam stutibhih puskalabhih

SYNONYMS

ami--all those; hi--certainly; tvam--unto You; sura-sanghah--groups of
demigods; visanti--entering; kecit--some of them; bhitah--out of fear;
pranjalayah--with folded hands; grnanti--offering prayers unto; svasti-
-all peace; iti--thus; uktva--speaking like that; maha-rsi--great
sages; siddha-sanghah--perfect sages; stuvanti--singing hymns; tvam--
unto You; stutibhih--with prayers; puskalabhih--Vedic hymns.

TRANSLATION

All the demigods are surrendering and entering into You. They are very
much afraid, and with folded hands they are singing the Vedic hymns.

PURPORT



The demigods in all the planetary systems feared the terrific
manifestation of the universal form and its glowing effulgence and so
prayed for protection.

TEXT 22

rudraditya vasavo ye ca sadhya
visve 'svinau marutas cosmapas ca
gandharva-yaksasura-siddha-sangha
viksante tvam vismitas caiva sarve

SYNONYMS

rudra--manifestations of Lord Siva; adityah--the Adityas; vasavah--the
Vasus; ye--all those; ca--and; sadhyah--the Sadhyas; visve--the
Visvedevas; asvinau--the Asvini-kumaras; marutah--the Maruts; ca--and;
usma-pah--the forefathers; ca--and; gandharva--of the Gandharvas;
yaksa--the Yaksas; asura-siddha--the demons and the perfected demigods;
sanghah--assemblies; viksante--are seeing; tvam--You; vismitah--in
wonder; ca--also; eva--certainly; sarve--all.

TRANSLATION

The different manifestations of Lord Siva, the Adityas, the Vasus, the
Sadhyas, the Visvedevas, the two Asvis, the Maruts, the forefathers and
the Gandharvas, the Yaksas, Asuras, and all perfected demigods are
beholding You in wonder.

TEXT 23

rupam mahat te bahu-vaktra-netram
maha-baho bahu-bahuru-padam
bahudaram bahu-damstra-karalam
drstva lokah pravyathitas tathaham

SYNONYMS

rupam--form; mahat--very great; te--of You; bahu--many; vaktra--faces;
netram--eyes; maha-baho--O mighty-armed one; bahu--many; bahu--arms;
uru--thighs; padam--legs; bahu-udaram--many bellies; bahu-damstra--many
teeth; karalam--horrible; drstva--seeing; lokah--all the planets;
pravyathitah--perturbed; tatha--similarly; aham--I.

TRANSLATION

O mighty-armed one, all the planets with their demigods are disturbed
at seeing Your many faces, eyes, arms, bellies and legs and Your
terrible teeth, and as they are disturbed, so am I.

TEXT 24

nabhah-sprsam diptam aneka-varnam
vyattananam dipta-visala-netram
drstva hi tvam pravyathitantar-atma
dhrtim na vindami samam ca visno

SYNONYMS



nabhah-sprsam--touching the sky; diptam--glowing; aneka--many; varnam--
color; vyatta--open; ananam--mouth; dipta--glowing; visala--very great;
netram--eyes; drstva--by seeing; hi--certainly; tvam--You; pravyathita-
-perturbed; antah--within; atma--soul; dhrtim--steadiness; na--no;
vindami--and have; samam--mental tranquillity; ca--also; visno--O Lord
Visnu.

TRANSLATION

O all-pervading Visnu, I can no longer maintain my equilibrium. Seeing
Your radiant colors fill the skies and beholding Your eyes and mouths,
I am afraid.

TEXT 25

damstra-karalani ca te mukhani
drstvaiva kalanala-sannibhani
diso na jane na labhe ca sarma
prasida devesa jagan-nivasa

SYNONYMS

damstra--teeth; karalani--like that; ca--also; te--Your; mukhani--
faces; drstva--seeing; eva--thus; kala-anala--the fire of death;
sannibhani--as if blazing; disah--directions; na jane--do not know; na
labhe--nor obtain; ca sarma--and grace; prasida--be pleased; deva-isa--
O Lord of all lords; jagat-nivasa--refuge of the worlds.

TRANSLATION

O Lord of lords, O refuge of the worlds, please be gracious to me. I
cannot keep my balance seeing thus Your blazing deathlike faces and
awful teeth. In all directions I am bewildered.

TEXTS 26-27

ami ca tvam dhrtarastrasya putrah
sarve sahaivavani-pala-sanghaih
bhismo dronah suta-putras tathasau
sahasmadiyair api yodha-mukhyaih

vaktrani te tvaramana visanti
damstra-karalani bhayanakani
kecid vilagna dasanantaresu
sandrsyante curnitair uttamangaih

SYNONYMS

ami--all those; ca--also; tvam--You; dhrtarastrasya--of Dhrtarastra;
putrah--sons; sarve--all; saha eva--along with; avani-pala--warrior
kings; sanghaih--the groups; bhismah--Bhismadeva; dronah--Dronacarya;
suta-putrah--Karna; tatha--also; asau--that; saha--with; asmadiyaih--
our; api--also; yodha-mukhyaih--chief among the warriors; vaktrani--
mouths; te--Your; tvaramanah--fearful; visanti--entering; damstra--
teeth; karalani--terrible; bhayanakani--very fearful; kecit--some of
them; vilagnah--being attacked; dasana-antaresu--between the teeth;
sandrsyante--being seen; curnitaih--smashed; uttama-angaih--by the
head.



TRANSLATION

All the sons of Dhrtarastra along with their allied kings, and Bhisma,
Drona and Karna, and all our soldiers are rushing into Your mouths,
their heads smashed by Your fearful teeth. I see that some are being
crushed between Your teeth as well.

PURPORT

In a previous verse the Lord promised to show Arjuna things he would be
very interested in seeing. Now Arjuna sees that the leaders of the
opposite party (Bhisma, Drona, Karna and all the sons of Dhrtarastra)
and their soldiers and Arjuna's own soldiers are all being annihilated.
This is an indication that Arjuna will emerge victorious in battle,
despite heavy losses on both sides. It is also mentioned here that
Bhisma, who is supposed to be unconquerable, will also be smashed. So
also Karna. Not only will the great warriors of the other party like
Bhisma be smashed, but some of the great warriors of Arjuna's side
also.

TEXT 28

yatha nadinam bahavo 'mbu-vegah
samudram evabhimukha dravanti
tatha tavami nara-loka-vira
visanti vaktrany abhivijvalanti

SYNONYMS

yatha--as; nadinam--of the rivers; bahavah--many; ambu-vegah--waves of
the waters; samudram--ocean; eva--certainly; abhimukhah--towards;
dravanti--gliding; tatha--similarly; tava--Your; ami--all those; nara-
loka-virah--the kings of human society; visanti--entering; vaktrani--
into the mouths; abhivijvalanti--blazing.

TRANSLATION

As the rivers flow into the sea, so all these great warriors enter Your
blazing mouths and perish.

TEXT 29

yatha pradiptam jvalanam patanga
visanti nasaya samrddha-vegah
tathaiva nasaya visanti lokas
tavapi vaktrani samrddha-vegah

SYNONYMS

yatha--as; pradiptam--blazing; jvalanam--fire; patangah--moths;
visanti--enters; nasaya--destruction; samrddha--full; vegah--speed;
tatha eva--similarly; nasaya--for destruction; visanti--entering;
lokah--all people; tava--unto You; api--also; vaktrani--in the mouths;
samrddha-vegah--with full speed.

TRANSLATION



I see all people rushing with full speed into Your mouths as moths dash
into a blazing fire.

TEXT 30

lelihyase grasamanah samantal
lokan samagran vadanair jvaladbhih
tejobhir apurya jagat samagram
bhasas tavograh pratapanti visno

SYNONYMS

lelihyase--licking; grasamanah--devouring; samantat--from all
directions; lokan--people; samagran--completely; vadanaih--by the
mouth; jvaladbhih--with blazing; tejobhih--by effulgence; apurya--
covering; jagat--the universe; samagram--all; bhasah--illuminating;
tava--Your; ugrah--terrible; pratapanti--scorching; visno--O all-
pervading Lord.

TRANSLATION

O Visnu, I see You devouring all people in Your flaming mouths and
covering the universe with Your immeasurable rays. Scorching the
worlds, You are manifest.

TEXT 31

akhyahi me ko bhavan ugra-rupo
namo 'stu te deva-vara prasida
vijnatum icchami bhavantam adyam
na hi prajanami tava pravrttim

SYNONYMS

akhyahi--please explain; me--unto me; kah--who; bhavan--You; ugra-
rupah--fierce form; namah astu--obeisances; te--unto You; deva-vara--
the great one amongst the demigods; prasida--be gracious; vijnatum--
just to know; icchami--I wish; bhavantam--You; adyam--the original; na-
-never; hi--certainly; prajanami--do I know; tava--Your; pravrttim--
mission.

TRANSLATION

O Lord of lords, so fierce of form, please tell me who You are. I offer
my obeisances unto You; please be gracious to me. I do not know what
Your mission is, and I desire to hear of it.

TEXT 32

sri-bhagavan uvaca
kalo 'smi loka-ksaya-krt pravrddho
lokan samahartum iha pravrttah
rte 'pi tvam na bhavisyanti sarve
ye 'vasthitah pratyanikesu yodhah

SYNONYMS



sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Personality of Godhead said; kalah--time; asmi-
-I am; loka--the worlds; ksaya-krt--destroyer; pravrddhah--to engage;
lokan--all people; samahartum--to destroy; iha--in this world;
pravrttah--to engage; rte api--without even; tvam--you; na--never;
bhavisyanti--will be; sarve--all; ye--who; avasthitah--situated; prati-
anikesu--on the opposite side; yodhah--the soldiers.

TRANSLATION

The Blessed Lord said: Time I am, destroyer of the worlds, and I have
come to engage all people. With the exception of you [the Pandavas],
all the soldiers here on both sides will be slain.

PURPORT

Although Arjuna knew that Krsna was his friend and the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, he was nonetheless puzzled by the various forms
exhibited by Krsna. Therefore he asked further about the actual mission
of this devastating force. It is written in the Vedas that the Supreme
Truth destroys everything, even Brahma. As stated in the Katha Upanisad
(1.2.25),

yasya brahma ca ksatram ca
ubhe bhavata odanah
mrtyur yasyopasecanam
ka ittha veda yatra sah

Eventually all the brahmanas, ksatriyas and everyone else are devoured
by the Supreme. This form of the Supreme Lord is the all-devouring
giant, and here Krsna presents Himself in that form of all-devouring
time. Except for a few Pandavas, everyone who was present in that
battlefield would be devoured by Him.
TEXT 33

tasmat tvam uttistha yaso labhasva
jitva satrun bhunksva rajyam samrddham
mayaivaite nihatah purvam eva
nimitta-matram bhava savya-sacin

SYNONYMS

tasmat--therefore; tvam--you; uttistha--get up; yasah--fame; labhasva--
gain; jitva--conquering; satrun--enemies; bhunksva--enjoy; rajyam--
kingdom; samrddham--flourishing; maya--by Me; eva--certainly; ete--all
these; nihatah--already killed; purvam eva--by previous arrangement;
nimitta-matram--just the cause; bhava--become; savya-sacin--O
Savyasaci.

TRANSLATION

Therefore get up and prepare to fight. After conquering your enemies
you will enjoy a flourishing kingdom. They are already put to death by
My arrangement, and you, O Savyasaci, can be but an instrument in the
fight.

PURPORT



Savya-sacin refers to one who can shoot arrows very expertly in the
field; thus Arjuna is addressed as an expert warrior capable of
delivering arrows to kill his enemies. "Just become an instrument":
nimitta-matram. This word is also very significant. The whole world is
moving according to the plan of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Foolish persons who do not have sufficient knowledge think that nature
is moving without a plan and all manifestations are but accidental
formations. There are many so-called scientists who suggest that
perhaps it was like this, or maybe like that, but there is no question
of "perhaps" and "maybe." There is a specific plan being carried out in
this material world. What is this plan? This cosmic manifestation is a
chance for the conditioned souls to go back to Godhead, back to home.
As long as they have the domineering mentality which makes them try to
lord it over material nature, they are conditioned. But anyone who can
understand the plan of the Supreme Lord and cultivate Krsna
consciousness is most intelligent. The creation and destruction of the
cosmic manifestation are under the superior guidance of God. Thus the
Battle of Kuruksetra was fought according to the plan of God. Arjuna
was refusing to fight, but he was told that he should fight and at the
same time desire the Supreme Lord. Then he would be happy. If one is in
full Krsna consciousness and if his life is devoted to His
transcendental service, he is perfect.

TEXT 34

dronam ca bhismam ca jayadratham ca
karnam tathanyan api yodha-viran
maya hatams tvam jahi ma vyathistha
yudhyasva jetasi rane sapatnan

SYNONYMS

dronam ca--also Drona; bhismam ca--also Bhisma; jayadratham ca--also
Jayadratha; karnam--also Karna; tatha--also; anyan--others; api--
certainly; yodha-viran--great warriors; maya--by Me; hatan--already
killed; tvam--you; jahi--become victorious; ma--never; vyathisthah--be
disturbed; yudhyasva--just fight; jeta asi--just conquer; rane--in the
fight; sapatnan--enemies.

TRANSLATION

THe Blessed Lord said: All the great warriors--Drona, Bhisma,
Jayadratha, Karna--are already destroyed. Simply fight, and you will
vanquish your enemies.

PURPORT

Every plan is made by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but He is so
kind and merciful to His devotees that He wants to give the credit to
His devotees who carry out His plan according to His desire. Life
should therefore move in such a way that everyone acts in Krsna
consciousness and understands the Supreme Personality of Godhead
through the medium of a spiritual master. The plans of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead are understood by His mercy, and the plans of
the devotees are as good as His plans. One should follow such plans and
be victorious in the struggle for existence.

TEXT 35



sanjaya uvaca
etac chrutva vacanam kesavasya
krtanjalir vepamanah kiriti
namaskrtva bhuya evaha krsnam
sa-gadgadam bhita-bhitah pranamya

SYNONYMS

sanjayah uvaca--Sanjaya said; etat--thus; srutva--hearing; vacanam--
speech; kesavasya--of Krsna; krta-anjalih--with folded hands;
vepamanah--trembling; kiriti--Arjuna; namaskrtva--offering obeisances;
bhuyah--again; eva--also; aha krsnam--said unto Krsna; sa-gadgadam--
faltering; bhita-bhitah--fearful; pranamya--offering obeisances.

TRANSLATION

Sanjaya said to Dhrtarastra: O King, after hearing these words from the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Arjuna trembled, fearfully offered
obeisances with folded hands and began, falteringly, to speak as
follows:

PURPORT

As we have already explained, because of the situation created by the
universal form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Arjuna became
bewildered in wonder; thus he began to offer his respectful obeisances
to Krsna again and again, and with faltering voice he began to pray,
not as a friend, but as a devotee in wonder.

TEXT 36

arjuna uvaca
sthane hrsikesa tava prakirtya
jagat prahrsyaty anurajyate ca
raksamsi bhitani diso dravanti
sarve namasyanti ca siddha-sanghah

SYNONYMS

arjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; sthane--rightly; hrsika-isa--O master of
all senses; tava--Your; prakirtya--glories; jagat--the entire world;
prahrsyati--rejoicing; anurajyate--becoming attached; ca--and;
raksamsi--the demons; bhitani--out of fear; disah--directions;
dravanti--fleeing; sarve--all; namasyanti--offering respect; ca--also;
siddha-sanghah--the perfect human beings.

TRANSLATION

O Hrsikesa, the world becomes joyful upon hearing Your name, and thus
everyone becomes attached to You. Although the perfected beings offer
You their respectful homage, the demons are afraid, and they flee here
and there. All this is rightly done.

PURPORT

Arjuna, after hearing from Krsna about the outcome of the Battle of
Kuruksetra, became an enlightened devotee of the Supreme Lord. He



admitted that everything done by Krsna is quite fit. Arjuna confirmed
that Krsna is the maintainer and the object of worship for the devotees
and the destroyer of the undesirables. His actions are equally good for
all. Arjuna understood herein that when the Battle of Kuruksetra was
being concluded, in outer space there were present many demigods,
siddhas, and the intelligentsia of the higher planets, and they were
observing the fight because Krsna was present there. When Arjuna saw
the universal form of the Lord, the demigods took pleasure in it, but
others, who were demons and atheists, could not stand it when the Lord
was praised. Out of their natural fear of the devastating form of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, they fled. Krsna's treatment of the
devotees and the atheists is praised by Arjuna. In all cases a devotee
glorifies the Lord because he knows that whatever He does is good for
all.

TEXT 37

kasmac ca te na nameran mahatman
gariyase brahmano 'py adi-kartre
ananta devesa jagan-nivasa
tvam aksaram sad-asat tat param yat

SYNONYMS

kasmat--why; ca--also; te--unto You; na--not; nameran--offer proper
obeisances; maha-atman--O great one; gariyase--You are better than;
brahmanah--Brahma; api--although; adi-kartre--the supreme creator;
ananta--unlimited; deva-isa--God of the gods; jagat-nivasa--O refuge of
the universe; tvam--You are; aksaram--imperishable; sat-asat--cause and
effect; tat param--transcendental; yat--because.

TRANSLATION

O great one, who stands above even Brahma, You are the original master.
Why should they not offer their homage up to You, O limitless one? O
refuge of the universe, You are the invincible source, the cause of all
causes, transcendental to this material manifestation.

PURPORT

By this offering of obeisances, Arjuna indicates that Krsna is
worshipable by everyone. He is all-pervading, and He is the Soul of
every soul. Arjuna is addressing Krsna as mahatma, which means that He
is most magnanimous and unlimited. Ananta indicates that there is
nothing which is not covered by the influence and energy of the Supreme
Lord, and devesa means that He is the controller of all demigods and is
above them all. He is the center of the whole universe. Arjuna also
thought that it was fitting that all the perfect living entities and
all powerful demigods offer their respectful obeisances unto Him
because no one is greater than Him. He especially mentions that Krsna
is greater than Brahma because Brahma is created by Him. Brahma is born
out of the lotus stem grown from the navel abdomen of Garbhodakasayi
Visnu, who is Krsna's plenary expansion; therefore Brahma and Lord
Siva, who is born of Brahma, and all other demigods must offer their
respectful obeisances. Thus the Lord is respected by Lord Siva and
Brahma and similar other demigods. The word aksaram is very significant
because this material creation is subject to destruction but the Lord
is above this material creation. He is the cause of all causes, and



being so, He is superior to all the conditioned souls within this
material nature as well as the material cosmic manifestation itself. He
is therefore the all-great Supreme.

TEXT 38

tvam adi-devah purusah puranas
tvam asya visvasya param nidhanam
vettasi vedyam ca param ca dhama
tvaya tatam visvam ananta-rupa

SYNONYMS

tvam--You; adi-devah--the original Supreme God; purusah--personality;
puranah--old; tvam--You; asya--this; visvasya--universe; param--
transcendental; nidhanam--refuge; vetta--knower; asi--You are; vedyam
ca--and the knowable; param ca--and transcendental; dhama--refuge;
tvaya--by You; tatam--pervaded; visvam--universe; ananta-rupa--
unlimited form.

TRANSLATION

You are the original Personality, the Godhead. You are the only
sanctuary of this manifested cosmic world. You know everything, and You
are all that is knowable. You are above the material modes O limitless
form! This whole cosmic manifestation is pervaded by You!

PURPORT

Everything is resting on the Supreme Personality of Godhead; therefore
He is the ultimate rest. Nidhanam means that everything, even the
Brahman effulgence, rests on the Supreme Personality of Godhead Krsna.
He is the knower of everything that is happening in this world, and if
knowledge has any end, He is the end of all knowledge; therefore He is
the known and the knowable. He is the object of knowledge because He is
all-pervading. Because He is the cause in the spiritual world, He is
transcendental. He is also the chief personality in the transcendental
world.

TEXT 39

vayur yamo 'gnir varunah sasankah
prajapatis tvam prapitamahas ca
namo namas te 'stu sahasra-krtvah
punas ca bhuyo 'pi namo namas te

SYNONYMS

vayuh--air; yamah--controller; agnih--fire; varunah--water; sasa-ankah-
-moon; prajapatih--Brahma; tvam--You; prapitamahah--grandfather; ca--
also; namah--offering respects; namah te--again my respects unto You;
astu--are being; sahasra-krtvah--a thousand times; punah ca--and again;
bhuyah--again; api--also; namah--offer my respects; namah te--offering
my respects unto You.

TRANSLATION



You are air, fire, water and You are the moon! You are the supreme
controller and the grandfather. Thus I offer my respectful obeisances
unto You a thousand times, and again and yet again!

PURPORT

The Lord is addressed here as air because the air is the most important
representation of all the demigods, being all-pervasive. Arjuna also
addresses Krsna as the grandfather because He is the father of Brahma,
the first living creature in the universe.

TEXT 40

namah purastad atha prsthatas te
namo 'stu te sarvata eva sarva
ananta-viryamita-vikramas tvam
sarvam samapnosi tato 'si sarvah

SYNONYMS

namah--offering obeisances; purastat--from the front; atha--also;
prsthatah--from behind; te--You; namah astu--offer my respects; te--
unto You; sarvatah--from all sides; eva sarva--because You are
everything; ananta-virya--unlimited potency; amita-vikramah--unlimited
force; tvam--You; sarvam--everything; samapnosi--cover; tatah asi--
therefore You are; sarvah--everything.

TRANSLATION

Obeisances from the front, from behind and from all sides! O unbounded
power, You are the master of limitless might! You are all-pervading,
and thus You are everything!

PURPORT

Out of loving ecstasy for Krsna, his friend, Arjuna is offering his
respects from all sides. He is accepting that He is the master of all
potencies and all prowess and far superior to all the great warriors
assembled on the battlefield. It is said in the Visnu Purana (1.9.69):

yo 'yam tavagato deva
samipam devata-ganah
sa tvam eva jagat-srasta
yatah sarva-gato bhavan

"Whoever comes before You, be he a demigod, is created by You, O
Supreme Personality of Godhead."

TEXTS 41-42

sakheti matva prasabham yad uktam
he krsna he yadava he sakheti
ajanata mahimanam tavedam
maya pramadat pranayena vapi

yac cavahasartham asat-krto 'si
vihara-sayyasana-bhojanesu
eko 'tha vapy acyuta tat-samaksam



tat ksamaye tvam aham aprameyam

SYNONYMS

sakha--friend; iti--thus; matva--thinking; prasabham--temporary; yat--
whatever; uktam--said; he krsna--O Krsna; he yadava--O Yadava; he sakhe
iti--O my dear friend; ajanata--without knowing; mahimanam--glories;
tava--Your; idam--this; maya--by me; pramadat--out of foolishness;
pranayena--out of love; va api--either; yat--whatever; ca--also;
avahasa-artham--for joking; asat-krtah--dishonor; asi--have been done;
vihara--in relaxation; sayya--in joking; asana--in a resting place;
bhojanesu--or while eating together; ekah--alone; atha va--or; api--
others; acyuta--O infallible one; tat-samaksam--as Your competitor;
tat--all those; ksamaye--excuse; tvam--from You; aham--I; aprameyam--
immeasurable.

TRANSLATION

I have in the past addressed You as "O Krsna," "O Yadava," "O my
friend," without knowing Your glories. Please forgive whatever I may
have done in madness or in love. I have dishonored You many times while
relaxing or while lying on the same bed or eating together, sometimes
alone and sometimes in front of many friends. Please excuse me for all
my offenses.

PURPORT

Although Krsna is manifested before Arjuna in His universal form,
Arjuna remembers his friendly relationship with Krsna and is therefore
asking pardon and requesting Him to excuse him for the many informal
gestures which arise out of friendship. He is admitting that formerly
he did not know that Krsna could assume such a universal form, although
Krsna explained it as his intimate friend. Arjuna did not know how many
times he may have dishonored Krsna by addressing Him "O my friend," "O
Krsna," "O Yadava," etc., without acknowledging His opulence. But Krsna
is so kind and merciful that in spite of such opulence He played with
Arjuna as a friend. Such is the transcendental loving reciprocation
between the devotee and the Lord. The relationship between the living
entity and Krsna is fixed eternally; it cannot be forgotten, as we can
see from the behavior of Arjuna. Although Arjuna has seen the opulence
in the universal form, he cannot forget his friendly relationship with
Krsna.

TEXT 43

pitasi lokasya caracarasya
tvam asya pujyas ca gurur gariyan
na tvat-samo 'sty abhyadhikah kuto 'nyo
loka-traye 'py apratima-prabhava

SYNONYMS

pita--father; asi--You are; lokasya--of all the world; cara--moving;
acarasya--nonmoving; tvam--You are; asya--of this; pujyah--worshipable;
ca--also; guruh--master; gariyan--glorious; na--never; tvat-samah--
equal to You; asti--there is; abhyadhikah--greater; kutah--how is it
possible; anyah--other; loka-traye--in three planetary systems; api--
also; apratima--immeasurable; prabhava--power.



TRANSLATION

You are the father of this complete cosmic manifestation, the
worshipable chief, the spiritual master. No one is equal to You, nor
can anyone be one with You. Within the three worlds, You are
immeasurable.

PURPORT

The Lord Krsna is worshipable as a father is worshipable for his son.
He is the spiritual master because He originally gave the Vedic
instructions to Brahma, and presently He is also instructing Bhagavad-
gita to Arjuna; therefore He is the original spiritual master, and any
bona fide spiritual master at the present moment must be a descendant
in the line of disciplic succession stemming from Krsna. Without being
a representative of Krsna, one cannot become a teacher or spiritual
master of transcendental subject matter.
The Lord is being paid obeisances in all respects. He is of
immeasurable greatness. No one can be greater than the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Krsna, because no one is equal to or higher
than Krsna within any manifestation, spiritual or material. Everyone is
below Him. No one can excel Him.
The Supreme Lord, Krsna, has senses and a body like the ordinary man,
but for Him there is no difference between His senses, body, mind and
Himself. Foolish persons who do not know Him perfectly say that Krsna
is different from His soul, mind, heart and everything else. Krsna is
absolute; therefore His activities and potencies are supreme. It is
also stated that He does not have senses like ours. He can perform all
sensual activities; therefore His senses are neither imperfect nor
limited. No one can be greater than Him, no one can be equal to Him,
and everyone is lower than Him.
Whoever knows His transcendental body, activities and perfection, after
quitting his body, returns to Him and doesn't come back again to this
miserable world. Therefore one should know that Krsna's activities are
different from others. The best policy is to follow the principles of
Krsna; that will make one perfect. It is also stated that there is no
one who is master of Krsna; everyone is His servant. The Caitanya-
caritamrta (Adi 5.142) confirms, ekale isvara krsna, ara saba bhrtya:
only Krsna is God, and everyone else is His servant. Everyone is
complying with His order. There is no one who can deny His order.
Everyone is acting according to His direction, being under His
superintendence. As stated in the Brahma-samhita, He is the cause of
all causes.

TEXT 44

tasmat pranamya pranidhaya kayam
prasadaye tvam aham isam idyam
piteva putrasya sakheva sakhyuh
priyah priyayarhasi deva sodhum

SYNONYMS

tasmat--therefore; pranamya--after offering obeisances; pranidhaya--
laying down; kayam--body; prasadaye--to beg mercy; tvam--unto You;
aham--I; isam--unto the Supreme Lord; idyam--who is worshipable; pita
iva--like a father; putrasya--of a son; sakha iva--like a friend;



sakhyuh--of a friend; priyah--lover; priyayah--of the dearmost; arhasi-
-You should; deva--my Lord; sodhum--tolerate.

TRANSLATION

You are the Supreme Lord, to be worshiped by every living being. Thus I
fall down to offer You my respects and ask Your mercy. Please tolerate
the wrongs that I may have done to You and bear with me as a father
with his son, or a friend with his friend, or a lover with his beloved.

PURPORT

Krsna's devotees relate to Krsna in various relationships; one might
treat Krsna as a son, one might treat Krsna as a husband, as a friend,
as a master, etc. Krsna and Arjuna are related in friendship. As the
father tolerates, or the husband or master tolerates, so Krsna
tolerates.

TEXT 45

adrsta-purvam hrsito 'smi drstva
bhayena ca pravyathitam mano me
tad eva me darsaya deva rupam
prasida devesa jagan-nivasa

SYNONYMS

adrsta-purvam--never seen before; hrsitah--gladdened; asmi--I am;
drstva--by seeing; bhayena--out of fear; ca--also; pravyathitam--
perturbed; manah--mind; me--my; tat--therefore; eva--certainly; me--
unto me; darsaya--show; deva--O Lord; rupam--the form; prasida--just be
gracious; deva-isa--O Lord of lords; jagat-nivasa--the refuge of the
universe.

TRANSLATION

After seeing this universal form, which I have never seen before, I am
gladdened, but at the same time my mind is disturbed with fear.
Therefore please bestow Your grace upon me and reveal again Your form
as the Personality of Godhead, O Lord of lords, O abode of the
universe.

PURPORT

Arjuna is always in confidence with Krsna because he is a very dear
friend, and as a dear friend is gladdened by his friend's opulence,
Arjuna is very joyful to see that his friend, Krsna, is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and can show such a wonderful universal form.
But at the same time, after seeing that universal form, he is afraid
that he has committed so many offenses to Krsna out of his unalloyed
friendship. Thus his mind is disturbed out of fear, although he had no
reason to fear. Arjuna therefore is asking Krsna to show His Narayana
form because He can assume any form. This universal form is material
and temporary, as the material world is temporary. But in the Vaikuntha
planets He has His transcendental form with four hands as Narayana.
There are innumerable planets in the spiritual sky, and in each of them
Krsna is present by His plenary manifestations of different names. Thus
Arjuna desired to see one of the forms manifest in the Vaikuntha



planets. Of course in each Vaikuntha planet the form of Narayana is
four-handed, and the four hands hold different arrangements of symbols-
-the conchshell, mace, lotus and disc. According to the different hands
these four things are held in, the Narayanas are named. All of these
forms are one and the same to Krsna; therefore Arjuna requests to see
His four-handed feature.

TEXT 46

kiritinam gadinam cakra-hastam
icchami tvam drastum aham tathaiva
tenaiva rupena catur-bhujena
sahasra-baho bhava visva-murte

SYNONYMS

kiritinam--with helmet; gadinam--with club; cakra-hastam--disc in hand;
icchami--I wish; tvam--You; drastum--to see; aham--I; tatha eva--in
that position; tena eva--by that; rupena--with form; catuh-bhujena--
four-handed; sahasra-baho--O thousand-handed one; bhava--just become;
visva-murte--O universal form.

TRANSLATION

O universal Lord, I wish to see You in Your four-armed form, with
helmeted head and with club, wheel, conch and lotus flower in Your
hands. I long to see You in that form.

PURPORT

In the Brahma-samhita (5.39) it is stated, ramadi-murtisu kala-niyamena
tisthan: the Lord is eternally situated in hundreds and thousands of
forms, and the main forms are those like Rama, Nrsimha, Narayana, etc.
There are innumerable forms. But Arjuna knew that Krsna is the original
Personality of Godhead assuming His temporary universal form. He is now
asking to see the form of Narayana, a spiritual form. This verse
establishes without any doubt the statement of the Srimad-Bhagavatam
that Krsna is the original Personality of Godhead and all other
features originate from Him. He is not different from His plenary
expansions, and He is God in any of His innumerable forms. In all of
these forms He is fresh like a young man. That is the constant feature
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One who knows Krsna at once
becomes free from all contamination of the material world.

TEXT 47

sri-bhagavan uvaca
maya prasannena tavarjunedam
rupam param darsitam atma-yogat
tejo-mayam visvam anantam adyam
yan me tvad anyena na drsta-purvam

SYNONYMS

sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; maya--by
Me; prasannena--happily; tava--unto you; arjuna--O Arjuna; idam--this;
rupam--form; param--transcendental; darsitam--shown; atma-yogat--by My
internal potency; tejah-mayam--full of effulgence; visvam--the entire



universe; anantam--unlimited; adyam--original; yat me--that which is
Mine; tvat anyena--besides you; na drsta-purvam--no one has previously
seen.

TRANSLATION

The Blessed Lord said: My dear Arjuna, happily do I show you this
universal form within the material world by My internal potency. No one
before you has ever seen this unlimited and glaringly effulgent form.

PURPORT

Arjuna wanted to see the universal form of the Supreme Lord, so out of
His mercy upon His devotee Arjuna, Lord Krsna showed him His universal
form full of effulgence and opulence. This form was glaring like the
sun, and its many faces were rapidly changing. Krsna showed this form
just to satisfy the desire of His friend Arjuna. This form was
manifested by Krsna through His internal potency, which is
inconceivable by human speculation. No one had seen this universal form
of the Lord before Arjuna, but because the form was shown to Arjuna,
other devotees in the heavenly planets and in other planets in outer
space could also see it. They did not seen it before, but because of
Arjuna they were able to see it. In other words, all the disciplic
devotees of the Lord could see the universal form which was shown to
Arjuna by the mercy of Krsna. Someone commented that this form was
shown to Duryodhana also when Krsna went to Duryodhana to negotiate for
peace. Unfortunately, Duryodhana did not accept the peace offer, but at
that time Krsna manifested some of His universal forms. But those forms
are different from this one shown to Arjuna. It is clearly said that no
one has ever seen this form before.

TEXT 48

na veda-yajnadhyayanair na danair
na ca kriyabhir na tapobhir ugraih
evam-rupah sakya aham nr-loke
drastum tvad anyena kuru-pravira

SYNONYMS

na--never; veda--Vedic study; yajna--sacrifice; adhyayanaih--study; na
danaih--by charity; na--never; ca--also; kriyabhih--by pious
activities; na tapobhih--by serious penances; ugraih--severe; evam--
thus; rupah--form; sakyah--can be seen; aham--I; nr-loke--in this
material world; drastum--to see; tvat--you; anyena--by another; kuru-
pravira--O best among the Kuru warriors.

TRANSLATION

O best of the Kuru warriors, no one before you has ever seen this
universal form of Mine, for neither by studying the Vedas, nor by
performing sacrifices, nor by charities or similar activities can this
form be seen. Only you have seen this.

PURPORT

The divine vision in this connection should be clearly understood. Who
can have divine vision? Divine means godly. Unless one attains the



status of divinity as a demigod, he cannot have divine vision. And what
is a demigod? It is stated in the Vedic scriptures that those who are
devotees of Lord Visnu are demigods (visnu-bhaktah smrta devah). Those
who are atheistic, i.e., who do not believe in Visnu, or who only
recognize the impersonal part of Krsna as the Supreme, cannot have the
divine vision. It is not possible to decry Krsna and at the same time
have the divine vision. One cannot have the divine vision without
becoming divine. In other words, those who have divine vision can also
see like Arjuna.
The Bhagavad-gita gives the description of the universal form, and this
description was unknown to everyone before Arjuna. Now one can have
some idea of the visva-rupa after this incident; those who are actually
divine can see the universal form of the Lord. But one cannot be divine
without being a pure devotee of Krsna. The devotees, however, who are
actually in the divine nature and who have divine vision, are not very
much interested to see the universal form of the Lord. As described in
the previous verse, Arjuna desired to see the four-handed form of Lord
Krsna as Visnu, and he was actually afraid of the universal form.
In this verse there are some significant words, like veda-
yajnadhyayanaih, which refers to studying Vedic literature and the
subject matter of sacrificial regulations. Veda refers to all kinds of
Vedic literature, namely the four Vedas (Rg, Yajur, Sama and Atharva)
and the eighteen Puranas, the Upanisads and the Vedanta-sutra. One can
study these at home or anywhere else. Similarly, there are sutras--
Kalpa-sutras and Mimamsa-sutras--for studying the method of sacrifice.
Danaih refers to charity which is offered to a suitable party, such as
those who are engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord-
-the brahmanas and the Vaisnavas. Similarly, "pious activities" refers
to the agni-hotra and the prescribed duties of the different castes.
And the voluntary acceptance of some bodily pains is called tapasya. So
one can perform all these, can accept bodily penances, give charity,
study the Vedas, etc., but unless he is a devotee like Arjuna, it is
not possible to see that universal form. Those who are impersonalists
are also imagining that they are seeing the universal form of the Lord,
but from Bhagavad-gita we understand that the impersonalists are not
devotees. Therefore they are unable to see the universal form of the
Lord.
There are many persons who create incarnations. They falsely claim an
ordinary human being to be an incarnation, but all this is foolishness.
We should follow the principles of Bhagavad-gita, otherwise there is no
possibility of attaining perfect spiritual knowledge. Although
Bhagavad-gita is considered the preliminary study of the science of
God, still it is so perfect that one can distinguish what is what. The
followers of a pseudo incarnation may say that they have also seen the
transcendental incarnation of God, the universal form, but that is not
acceptable because it is clearly stated here that unless one becomes a
devotee of Krsna, one cannot see the universal form of God. So one
first of all has to become a pure devotee of Krsna; then he can claim
that he can show the universal form of what he has seen. A devotee of
Krsna cannot accept false incarnations or followers of false
incarnations.

TEXT 49

ma te vyatha ma ca vimudha-bhavo
drstva rupam ghoram idrn mamedam
vyapeta-bhih prita-manah punas tvam
tad eva me rupam idam prapasya



SYNONYMS

ma--let it not be; te--unto you; vyatha--trouble; ma--let it not be;
ca--also; vimudha-bhavah--bewilderment; drstva--by seeing; rupam--form;
ghoram--horrible; idrk--like this; mama--My; idam--as it is; vyapeta-
bhih--just become free from all fear; prita-manah--be pleased in mind;
punah--again; tvam--you; tat--that; eva--thus; me--My; rupam--form;
idam--this; prapasya--just see.

TRANSLATION

Your mind has been perturbed upon seeing this horrible feature of Mine.
Now let it be finished. My devotee, be free from all disturbance. With
a peaceful mind you can now see the form you desire.

PURPORT

In the beginning of Bhagavad-gita Arjuna was worried about killing
Bhisma and Drona, his worshipful grandfather and master. But Krsna said
that he need not be afraid of killing his grandfather. When they tried
to disrobe Draupadi in the assembly, Bhisma and Drona were silent, and
for such negligence of duty they should be killed. Krsna showed His
universal form to Arjuna just to show him that these people were
already killed for their unlawful action. That scene was shown to
Arjuna because devotees are always peaceful, and they cannot perform
such horrible actions. The purpose of the revelation of the universal
form was shown; now Arjuna wanted to see the four-armed form, and Krsna
showed him. A devotee is not much interested in the universal form, for
it does not enable one to reciprocate loving feelings. A devotee wants
to offer his respectful worshiping feelings; thus he wants to see the
two-handed or four-handed Krsna form so he can reciprocate in loving
service with the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 50

sanjaya uvaca
ity arjunam vasudevas tathoktva
svakam rupam darsayam asa bhuyah
asvasayam asa ca bhitam enam
bhutva punah saumya-vapur mahatma

SYNONYMS

sanjayah uvaca--Sanjaya said; iti--thus; arjunam--unto Arjuna;
vasudevah--Krsna; tatha--that way; uktva--saying; svakam--His own;
rupam--form; darsayam asa--showed; bhuyah--again; asvasayam asa--also
convinced him; ca--also; bhitam--fearful; enam--him; bhutva punah--
becoming again; saumya-vapuh--beautiful form; maha-atma--the great one.

TRANSLATION

Sanjaya said to Dhrtarastra: The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna,
while speaking thus to Arjuna, displayed His real four-armed form, and
at last He showed him His two-armed form, thus encouraging the fearful
Arjuna.

PURPORT



When Krsna appeared as the son of Vasudeva and Devaki, He first of all
appeared as four-armed Narayana, but when He was requested by His
parents, He transformed Himself into an ordinary child in appearance.
Similarly, Krsna knew that Arjuna was not interested in seeing a four-
handed form of Krsna, but since he asked to see this four-handed form,
He also showed him this form again and then showed Himself in His two-
handed form. The word saumya-vapuh is very significant. Saumya-vapuh is
a very beautiful form; it is known as the most beautiful form. When He
was present, everyone was attracted simply by Krsna's form, and because
Krsna is director of the universe, He just banished the fear of Arjuna,
His devotee, and showed him again His beautiful form of Krsna. In the
Brahma-samhita (5.38) it is stated, premanjana-cchurita-bhakti-
vilocanena: only a person whose eyes are smeared with the ointment of
love can see the beautiful form of Sri Krsna.

TEXT 51

arjuna uvaca
drstvedam manusam rupam
tava saumyam janardana
idanim asmi samvrttah
sa-cetah prakrtim gatah

SYNONYMS

arjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; drstva--seeing; idam--this; manusam--human
being; rupam--form; tava--Your; saumyam--very beautiful; janardana--O
chastiser of the enemies; idanim--just now; asmi--I am; samvrttah--
settled; sa-cetah--in my consciousness; prakrtim--my own; gatah--I am.

TRANSLATION

When Arjuna thus saw Krsna in His original form, he said: Seeing this
humanlike form, so very beautiful, my mind is now pacified and I am
restored to my original nature.

PURPORT

Here the words manusam rupam clearly indicate the Supreme Personality
of Godhead to be originally two-handed. Those who deride Krsna to be an
ordinary person are shown here to be ignorant of His divine nature. If
Krsna is like an ordinary human being, then how is it possible for Him
to show the universal form and again to show the four-handed Narayana
form? So it is very clearly stated in Bhagavad-gita that one who thinks
that Krsna is an ordinary person and misguides the reader by claiming
that it is the impersonal Brahman within Krsna speaking, is doing the
greatest injustice. Krsna has actually shown His universal form and His
four-handed Visnu form. So how can He be an ordinary human being? A
pure devotee is not confused by misguiding commentaries on Bhagavad-
gita because he knows what is what. The original verses of Bhagavad-
gita are as clear as the sun; they do not require lamp-light from
foolish commentators.

TEXT 52

sri-bhagavan uvaca
su-durdarsam idam rupam



drstavan asi yan mama
deva apy asya rupasya
nityam darsana-kanksinah

SYNONYMS

sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; su-
durdarsam--very difficult to be seen; idam--this; rupam--form; drstavan
asi--as you have seen; yat--which; mama--of Mine; devah--the demigods;
api asya--also this; rupasya--form; nityam--eternally; darsana-
kanksinah--always aspire to see.

TRANSLATION

The Blessed Lord said: My dear Arjuna, the form which you are now
seeing is very difficult to behold. Even the demigods are ever seeking
the opportunity to see this form which is so dear.

PURPORT

In the forty-eighth verse of this chapter Lord Krsna concluded
revealing His universal form and informed Arjuna that this form is not
possible to be seen by so many activities, sacrifices, etc. Now here
the word su-durdarsam is used, indicating that Krsna's two-handed form
is still more confidential. One may be able to see the universal form
of Krsna by adding a little tinge of devotional service to various
activities like penance, Vedic study and philosophical speculation,
etc. It may be possible, but without a tinge of bhakti, one cannot see;
that has already been explained. Still, beyond that universal form, the
form of Krsna as a two-handed man is still more difficult to see, even
for demigods like Brahma and Lord Siva. They desire to see Him, and we
have evidence in the Srimad-Bhagavatam that when He was supposed to be
in the womb of His mother, Devaki, all the demigods from heaven came to
see the marvel of Krsna. They even waited to see Him. A foolish person
may deride Him, but that is an ordinary person. Krsna is actually
desired to be seen by demigods like Brahma and Siva in His two-armed
form.
In Bhagavad-gita (9.11) it is also confirmed, avajananti mam mudha
manusim tanum asritah: He is not visible to the foolish persons who
deride Him. Krsna's body, as confirmed by Brahma-samhita and confirmed
by Krsna Himself in Bhagavad-gita, is completely spiritual and full of
bliss and eternality. His body is never like a material body. But for
some who make a study of Krsna by reading Bhagavad-gita or similar
Vedic scriptures, Krsna is a problem. For one using a material process,
Krsna is considered to be a great historical personality and very
learned philosopher. But He isn't an ordinary man.  But some think that
even though He was so powerful, He had to accept a material body.
Ultimately they think that the Absolute Truth is impersonal; therefore
they think that from His impersonal feature He assumed a personal
feature attached to material nature. This is a materialistic
calculation of the Supreme Lord. Another calculation is speculative.
Those who are in search of knowledge also speculate on Krsna and
consider Him to be less important than the universal form of the
Supreme. Thus some think that the universal form of Krsna which was
manifested to Arjuna is more important than His personal form.
According to them, the personal form of the Supreme is something
imaginary. They believe that in the ultimate issue, the Absolute Truth
is not a person. But the transcendental process is described in



Bhagavad-gita, Chapter Two: to hear about Krsna from authorities. That
is the actual Vedic process, and those who are actually in the Vedic
line hear about Krsna from authority, and by repeated hearing about
Him, Krsna becomes dear. As we have several times discussed, Krsna is
covered by His yoga-maya potency. He is not to be seen or revealed to
anyone and everyone. Only by one to whom He reveals Himself can He be
seen. This is confirmed in Vedic literature; for one who is a
surrendered soul, the Absolute Truth can actually be understood. The
transcendentalist, by continuous Krsna consciousness and devotional
service to Krsna, can have his spiritual eyes opened and can see Krsna
by revelation. Such a revelation is not possible even for the demigods;
therefore it is difficult even for the demigods to understand Krsna in
His two-handed form. The conclusion is that although to see the
universal form of Krsna is very, very difficult and not possible for
anyone and everyone, it is still more difficult to understand His
personal form as Syamasundara.

TEXT 53

naham vedair na tapasa
na danena na cejyaya
sakya evam-vidho drastum
drstavan asi mam yatha

SYNONYMS

na--never; aham--I; vedaih--by study of the Vedas; na--never; tapasa--
by serious penances; na--never; danena--by charity; na--never; ca--
also; ijyaya--by worship; sakyah--it is possible; evam-vidhah--like
this; drastum--to see; drstavan--seeing; asi--you are; mam--Me; yatha--
as.

TRANSLATION

The form which you are seeing with your transcendental eyes cannot be
understood simply by studying the Vedas, nor by undergoing serious
penances, nor by charity, nor by worship. It is not by these means that
one can see Me as I am.

PURPORT

Krsna first appeared before His parents Devaki and Vasudeva in a four-
handed form, and then He transformed Himself into the two-handed form.
This mystery is very difficult to understand for those who are atheists
or who are devoid of devotional service. For scholars who have simply
studied Vedic literature by way of speculation or mere academic
interest, Krsna is not easy to understand. Nor is He to be understood
by persons who officially go to the temple to offer worship. They make
their visit, but they cannot understand Krsna as He is. Krsna can be
understood only through the path of devotional service, as explained by
Krsna Himself in the next verse.

TEXT 54

bhaktya tv ananyaya sakya
aham evam-vidho 'rjuna
jnatum drastum ca tattvena
pravestum ca parantapa



SYNONYMS

bhaktya--by devotional service; tu--but; ananyaya--without being mixed
with fruitive activities or speculative knowledge; sakyah--possible;
aham--I; evam-vidhah--like this; arjuna--O Arjuna; jnatum--to know;
drastum--to see; ca--and; tattvena--in fact; pravestum--and to enter
into; ca--also; parantapa--O mighty-armed one.

TRANSLATION

My dear Arjuna, only by undivided devotional service can I be
understood as I am, standing before you, and can thus be seen directly.
Only in this way can you enter into the mysteries of My understanding.

PURPORT

Krsna can be understood only by the process of undivided devotional
service. He explicitly explains this in this verse so unauthorized
commentators, who try to understand Bhagavad-gita by the speculative
process, will know that they are simply wasting their time. No one can
understand Krsna or how He came from parents in a four-handed form and
at once changed Himself into a two-handed form. It is clearly stated
here that no one can see Him. Those who, however, are very experienced
students of Vedic literature can learn about Him from the Vedic
literature in so many ways. There are so many rules and regulations,
and if one at all wants to understand Krsna, he must follow the
regulative principles described in the authoritative literature. One
can perform penance in accordance with those principles. As far as
charity is concerned, it is plain that charity should be given to the
devotees of Krsna who are engaged in His devotional service to spread
the Krsna philosophy or Krsna consciousness throughout the world. Krsna
consciousness is a benediction to humanity. Lord Caitanya was
appreciated by Rupa Gosvami as the most munificent man of charity
because love of Krsna, which is very difficult to achieve, was
distributed freely by Him. And if one worships as prescribed in the
temple (in the temples in India there is always some statue, usually of
Visnu or Krsna), that is a chance to progress by offering worship and
respect to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For the beginners in
devotional service to the Lord, temple worship is essential, and this
is confirmed in the Vedic literature.
One who has unflinching devotion for the Supreme Lord and is directed
by the spiritual master, can see the Supreme Personality of Godhead by
revelation. For one who does not take personal training under the
guidance of a bona fide spiritual master, it is impossible to even
begin to understand Krsna. The word tu is specifically used here to
indicate that no other process can be used, can be recommended, or can
be successful in understanding Krsna.
The personal forms of Krsna, the two-handed form and the four-handed,
are completely different from the temporary universal form shown to
Arjuna. The four-handed form is Narayana and the two-handed form is
Krsna; they are eternal and transcendental, whereas the universal form
exhibited to Arjuna is temporary. The very word sudurdarsam, meaning
difficult to see, suggests that no one saw that universal form. It also
suggests that amongst the devotees there was no necessity of showing
it. That form was exhibited by Krsna at the request of Arjuna because
in the future, when one represents himself as an incarnation of God,
people can ask to see his universal form.



Krsna changes from the universal form to the four-handed form of
Narayana and then to His own natural form of two hands. This indicates
that the four-handed forms and other forms mentioned in Vedic
literature are all emanations of the original two-handed Krsna. He is
the origin of all emanations. Krsna is distinct even from these forms,
what to speak of the impersonal conception. As far as the four-handed
forms of Krsna are concerned, it is stated clearly that even the most
identical four-handed form of Krsna (which is known as Maha-Visnu, who
is lying on the cosmic ocean and from whose breathing so many
innumerable universes are passing out and entering) is also an
expansion of the Supreme Lord. Therefore one should conclusively
worship the personal form of Krsna as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead who is eternity, bliss and knowledge. He is the source of all
forms of Visnu, He is the source of all forms of incarnation, and He is
the original Supreme Personality, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gita.
In the Vedic literature it is stated that the Supreme Absolute Truth is
a person. His name is Krsna, and He sometimes descends on this earth.
Similarly, in Srimad-Bhagavatam there is a description of all kinds of
incarnations of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and there it is
said that Krsna is not an incarnation of God but is the original
Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself (krsnas tu bhagavan svayam).
Similarly, in Bhagavad-gita the Lord says, mattah parataram nanyat:
"There is nothing superior to My form as the Personality of Godhead
Krsna." He also says elsewhere in Bhagavad-gita, aham adir hi devanam:
"I am the origin of all the demigods." And after understanding
Bhagavad-gita from Krsna, Arjuna also confirms this in the following
words: param brahma param dhama pavitram-paramam bhavan: "I now fully
understand that You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
Absolute Truth, and that You are the refuge of everything." Therefore
the universal form which Krsna showed to Arjuna is not the original
form of God. The original is the Krsna form. The universal form, with
its thousands and thousands of heads and hands, is manifest just to
draw the attention of those who have no love for God. It is not God's
original form.
The universal form is not attractive for pure devotees, who are in love
with the Lord in different transcendental relationships. The Supreme
Godhead exchanges transcendental love in His original form of Krsna.
Therefore to Arjuna, who was so intimately related with Krsna in
friendship, this form of the universal manifestation was not pleasing;
rather, it was fearful. Arjuna, who is a constant companion of Krsna's,
must have had transcendental eyes; he was not an ordinary man.
Therefore he was not captivated by the universal form. This form may
seem wonderful to persons who are involved in elevating themselves by
fruitive activities, but to persons who are engaged in devotional
service, the two-handed form of Krsna is the most dear.

TEXT 55

mat-karma-krn mat-paramo
mad-bhaktah sanga-varjitah
nirvairah sarva-bhutesu
yah sa mam eti pandava

SYNONYMS

mat-karma-krt--engaged in doing My work; mat-paramah--considering Me
the Supreme; mat-bhaktah--engaged in My devotional service; sanga-
varjitah--freed from the contamination of previous activities and



mental speculation; nirvairah--without an enemy; sarva-bhutesu--to
every living entity yah--one who; sah--he; mam--unto Me; eti--comes;
pandava--O son of Pandu.

TRANSLATION

My dear Arjuna, one who is engaged in My pure devotional service, free
from the contaminations of previous activities and from mental
speculation, who is friendly to every living entity, certainly comes to
Me.

PURPORT

Anyone who wants to approach the supreme of all the Personalities of
Godhead, on the Krsnaloka planet in the spiritual sky, and be
intimately connected with the Supreme Personality, Krsna, must take
this formula, as is stated by the Supreme Himself. Therefore, this
verse is considered to be the essence of Bhagavad-gita. The Bhagavad-
gita is a book directed to the conditioned souls, who are engaged in
the material world with the purpose of lording it over nature and who
do not know of the real, spiritual life. The Bhagavad-gita is meant to
show how one can understand his spiritual existence and his eternal
relationship with the supreme spiritual personality and to teach one
how to go back home, back to Godhead. Now here is the verse which
clearly explains the process by which one can attain success in his
spiritual activity: devotional service.
As far as work is concerned, one should transfer his energy entirely to
Krsna conscious activities. No work should be done by any man except in
relationship to Krsna. This is called krsna-karma. One may be engaged
in various activities, but one should not be attached to the result of
his work, but the result should be done for Him. For example, one may
be engaged in business, but to transform that activity into Krsna
consciousness, one has to do business for Krsna. If Krsna is the
proprietor of the business, then Krsna should enjoy the profit of the
business. If a businessman is in possession of thousands and thousands
of dollars, and if he has to offer all this to Krsna, he can do it.
This is work for Krsna. Instead of constructing a big building for his
sense gratification, he can construct a nice temple for Krsna, and he
can install the Deity of Krsna and arrange for the Deity's service, as
is outlined in the authorized books of devotional service. This is all
krsna-karma. One should not be attached to the result of his work, but
the result should be offered to Krsna. One should also accept as
prasadam, food, the remnants of offerings to Krsna. If one constructs a
very big building for Krsna and installs the Deity of Krsna, one is not
prohibited from living there, but it is understood that the proprietor
of the building is Krsna. That is called Krsna consciousness. If,
however, one is not able to construct a temple for Krsna, one can
engage himself in cleansing the temple of Krsna; that is also krsna-
karma. One can cultivate a garden. Anyone who has land--in India, at
least, any poor man has a certain amount of land--can utilize that for
Krsna by growing flowers to offer Him. One can sow tulasi plants,
because tulasi leaves are very important, and Krsna has recommended
this in Bhagavad-gita. Patram puspam phalam toyam. Krsna desires that
one offer Him either a leaf, or a flower, or fruit, or a little water--
and He is satisfied. This leaf especially refers to the tulasi. So one
can sow tulasi and pour water on the plant. Thus, even the poorest man
can engage in the service of Krsna. These are some of the examples of
how one can engage in working for Krsna.



The word mat-paramah refers to one who considers the association of
Krsna in His supreme abode to be the highest perfection of life. Such a
person does not wish to be elevated to the higher planets such as the
moon or sun or heavenly planets, or even the highest planet of this
universe, Brahmaloka. He has no attraction for that. He is only
attracted to being transferred to the spiritual sky. And even in the
spiritual sky he is not satisfied with merging into the glowing
brahmajyoti effulgence, for he wants to enter into the highest
spiritual planet, namely Krsnaloka, Goloka Vrndavana. He has full
knowledge of that planet, and therefore he is not interested in any
other. As indicated by the word mad-bhaktah, he fully engages in
devotional service, specifically in the nine processes of devotional
engagement: hearing, chanting, remembering, worshiping, serving the
lotus feet of the Lord, offering prayers, carrying out the orders of
the Lord, making friends with Him, and surrendering everything to Him.
One can engage in all nine devotional processes, or eight, or seven, or
at least in one, and that will surely make one perfect.
The term sanga-varjitah is very significant. One should disassociate
himself from persons who are against Krsna. Not only are the atheistic
persons against Krsna, but so also are those who are attracted to
fruitive activities and mental speculation. Therefore the pure form of
devotional service is described in Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.1.11) as
follows:

anyabhilasita-sunyam
jnana-karmady-anavrtam
anukulyena krsnanu-
silanam bhaktir uttama

In this verse Srila Rupa Gosvami clearly states that if anyone wants to
execute unalloyed devotional service, he must be freed from all kinds
of material contamination. He must be freed from the association of
persons who are addicted to fruitive activities and mental speculation.
When, freed from such unwanted association and from the contamination
of material desires, one favorably cultivates knowledge of Krsna, that
is called pure devotional service. Anukulyasya sankalpah pratikulyasya
varjanam (Hari-bhakti-vilasa 11.676). One should think of Krsna and act
for Krsna favorably, not unfavorably. Kamsa was an enemy of Krsna's.
From the very beginning of Krsna's birth, he planned in so many ways to
kill Him, and because he was always unsuccessful, he was always
thinking of Krsna. Thus while working, while eating and while sleeping,
he was always Krsna conscious in every respect, but that Krsna
consciousness was not favorable, and therefore in spite of his always
thinking of Krsna twenty-four hours a day, he was considered a demon,
and Krsna at last killed him. Of course anyone who is killed by Krsna
attains salvation immediately, but that is not the aim of the pure
devotee. The pure devotee does not even want salvation. He does not
want to be transferred even to the highest planet, Goloka Vrndavana.
His only objective is to serve Krsna wherever he may be.
A devotee of Krsna is friendly to everyone. Therefore it is said here
that he has no enemy (nirvairah). How is this? A devotee situated in
Krsna consciousness knows that only devotional service to Krsna can
relieve a person from all the problems of life. He has personal
experience of this, and therefore he wants to introduce this system,
Krsna consciousness, into human society. There are many examples in
history of devotees of the Lord risking their lives for the spreading
of God consciousness. The favorite example is Lord Jesus Christ. He was
crucified by the nondevotees, but he sacrificed his life for spreading



God consciousness. Of course, it would be superficial to understand
that he was killed. Similarly, in India also there are many examples,
such as Thakura Haridasa and Prahlada Maharaja. Why such risk? Because
they wanted to spread Krsna consciousness, and it is difficult. A Krsna
conscious person knows that if a man is suffering, it is due to his
forgetfulness of his eternal relationship with Krsna. Therefore, the
highest benefit one can render to human society is relieving one's
neighbor from all material problems. In such a way, a pure devotee is
engaged in the service of the Lord. Now, we can imagine how merciful
Krsna is to those engaged in His service, risking everything for Him.
Therefore it is certain that such persons must reach the supreme planet
after leaving the body.
In summary, the universal form of Krsna, which is a temporary
manifestation, and the form of time which devours everything, and even
the form of Visnu, four-handed, have all been exhibited by Krsna. Thus
Krsna is the origin of all these manifestations. It is not that Krsna
is a manifestation of the original visva-rupa, or Visnu. Krsna is the
origin of all forms. There are hundreds and thousands of Visnus, but
for a devotee, no form of Krsna is important but the original form,
two-handed Syamasundara. In the Brahma-samhita it is stated that those
who are attached to the Syamasundara form of Krsna in love and devotion
can see Him always within the heart and cannot see anything else. One
should understand, therefore, that the purport of this Eleventh Chapter
is that the form of Krsna is essential and supreme.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Eleventh Chapter of the
Srimad Bhagavad-gita in the matter of the Universal Form.

Chapter 12
Devotional Service

TEXT 1

arjuna uvaca
evam satata-yukta ye
bhaktas tvam paryupasate
ye capy aksaram avyaktam
tesam ke yoga-vittamah

SYNONYMS

arjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; evam--thus; satata--always; yuktah--
engaged; ye--those; bhaktah--devotees; tvam--unto You; paryupasate--
properly worship; ye--those; ca--also; api--again; aksaram--beyond the
senses; avyaktam--unmanifested; tesam--of them; ke--who; yoga-vit-
tamah--the most perfect.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna inquired: What is considered to be more perfect, those who are
properly engaged in Your devotional service, or those who worship the
impersonal Brahman, the unmanifested?

PURPORT

Krsna has now explained about the personal, the impersonal and the
universal and has described all kinds of devotees and yogis. Generally,
the transcendentalists can be divided into two classes. One is the



impersonalist, and the other is the personalist. The personalist
devotee engages himself with all energy in the service of the Supreme
Lord. The impersonalist engages himself not directly in the service of
Krsna but in meditation on the impersonal Brahman, the unmanifested.
We find in this chapter that of the different processes for realization
of the Absolute Truth, bhakti-yoga, devotional service, is the highest.
If one at all desires to have the association of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, then he must take to devotional service.
Those who worship the Supreme Lord directly by devotional service are
called personalists. Those who engage themselves in meditation on the
impersonal Brahman are called impersonalists. Arjuna is here
questioning which position is better. There are different ways to
realize the Absolute Truth, but Krsna indicates in this chapter that
bhakti-yoga, or devotional service to Him, is highest of all. It is the
most direct, and it is the easiest means for association with the
Godhead.
In the Second Chapter the Lord explains that a living entity is not the
material body but is a spiritual spark, a part of the Absolute Truth.
In the Seventh Chapter He speaks of the living entity as part and
parcel of the supreme whole and recommends that he transfer his
attention fully to the whole. In the Eighth Chapter it is stated that
whoever thinks of Krsna at the moment of death is at once transferred
to the spiritual sky, Krsna's abode. And at the end of the Sixth
Chapter the Lord says that out of all the yogis, he who thinks of Krsna
within himself is considered to be the most perfect. So throughout the
Gita personal devotion to Krsna is recommended as the highest form of
spiritual realization. Yet there are those who are still attracted to
Krsna's impersonal  brahmajyoti effulgence, which is the all-pervasive
aspect of the Absolute Truth and which is unmanifest and beyond the
reach of the senses. Arjuna would like to know which of these two types
of transcendentalists is more perfect in knowledge. In other words, he
is clarifying his own position because he is attached to the personal
form of Krsna. He is not attached to the impersonal Brahman. He wants
to know whether his position is secure. The impersonal manifestation,
either in this material world or in the spiritual world of the Supreme
Lord, is a problem for meditation. Actually one cannot perfectly
conceive of the impersonal feature of the Absolute Truth. Therefore
Arjuna wants to say, "What is the use of such a waste of time?" Arjuna
experienced in the Eleventh Chapter that to be attached to the personal
form of Krsna is best because he could thus understand all other forms
at the same time and there was no disturbance to his love for Krsna.
This important question asked of Krsna by Arjuna will clarify the
distinction between the impersonal and personal conceptions of the
Absolute Truth.

TEXT 2

sri-bhagavan uvaca
mayy avesya mano ye mam
nitya-yukta upasate
sraddhaya parayopetas
te me yuktatama matah

SYNONYMS

sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; mayi--unto
Me; avesya--fixing; manah--mind; ye--one who; mam--unto Me; nitya--
always; yuktah--engaged; upasate--worships; sraddhaya--with faith;



paraya--transcendental; upetah--engages; te--they; me--Me; yukta-tamah-
-most perfect; matah--I consider.

TRANSLATION

The Blessed Lord said: He whose mind is fixed on My personal form,
always engaged in worshiping Me with great and transcendental faith, is
considered by Me to be most perfect.

PURPORT

In answer to Arjuna's question, Krsna clearly says that he who
concentrates upon His personal form and who worships Him with faith and
devotion is to be considered the most perfect in yoga. For one in such
Krsna consciousness there are no material activities because everything
is done for Krsna. A pure devotee is constantly engaged. Sometimes he
chants, sometimes he hears or reads books about Krsna, or sometimes he
cooks prasadam or goes to the marketplace to purchase something for
Krsna, or sometimes he washes the temple or the dishes--whatever he
does, he does not let a single moment pass without devoting his
activities to Krsna. Such action is in full samadhi.

TEXTS 3-4

ye tv aksaram anirdesyam
avyaktam paryupasate
sarvatra-gam acintyam ca
kuta-stham acalam dhruvam

sanniyamyendriya-gramam
sarvatra sama-buddhayah
te prapnuvanti mam eva
sarva-bhuta-hite ratah

SYNONYMS

ye--those; tu--but; aksaram--which is beyond the perception of the
senses; anirdesyam--indefinite; avyaktam--unmanifested; paryupasate--
completely engages; sarvatra-gam--all-pervading; acintyam--
inconceivable; ca--also; kuta-stham--in the center; acalam--immovable;
dhruvam--fixed; sanniyamya--controlling; indriya-gramam--all the
senses; sarvatra--everywhere; sama-buddhayah--equally disposed; te--
they; prapnuvanti--achieve; mam--unto Me; eva--certainly; sarva-bhuta-
hite--all living entities' welfare; ratah--engaged.

TRANSLATION

But those who fully worship the unmanifested, that which lies beyond
the perception of the senses, the all-pervading, inconceivable, fixed
and immovable--the impersonal conception of the Absolute Truth--by
controlling the various senses and being equally disposed to everyone,
such persons, engaged in the welfare of all, at last achieve Me.

PURPORT

Those who do not directly worship the Supreme Godhead, Krsna, but who
attempt to achieve the same goal by an indirect process, also
ultimately achieve the supreme goal, Sri Krsna, as is stated, "After



many births the man of wisdom seeks refuge in Me, knowing that Vasudeva
is all." When a person comes to full knowledge after many births, he
surrenders unto Lord Krsna. If one approaches the Godhead by the method
mentioned in this verse, he has to control the senses, render service
to everyone and engage in the welfare of all beings. It is inferred
that one has to approach Lord Krsna, otherwise there is no perfect
realization. Often there is much penance involved before one fully
surrenders unto Him.
In order to perceive the Supersoul within the individual soul, one has
to cease the sensual activities of seeing, hearing, tasting, working,
etc. Then one comes to understand that the Supreme Soul is present
everywhere. Realizing this, one envies no living entity--he sees no
difference between man and animal because he sees soul only, not the
outer covering. But for the common man, this method of impersonal
realization is very difficult.

TEXT 5

kleso 'dhikataras tesam
avyaktasakta-cetasam
avyakta hi gatir duhkham
dehavadbhir avapyate

SYNONYMS

klesah--trouble; adhika-tarah--more troublesome; tesam--of them;
avyakta--to unmanifested; asakta--being attached; cetasam--of those
whose minds; avyakta--toward the unmanifested; hi--certainly; gatih
duhkham--progress is troublesome; deha-vadbhih--of the embodiments;
avapyate--achieve.

TRANSLATION

For those whose minds are attached to the unmanifested, impersonal
feature of the Supreme, advancement is very troublesome. To make
progress in that discipline is always difficult for those who are
embodied.

PURPORT

The group of transcendentalists who follow the path of the
inconceivable, unmanifested, impersonal feature of the Supreme Lord are
called jnana-yogis, and persons who are in full Krsna consciousness,
engaged in devotional service to the Lord, are called bhakti-yogis.
Now, here the difference between jnana-yoga and bhakti-yoga is
definitely expressed. The process of jnana-yoga, although ultimately
bringing one to the same goal, is very troublesome, whereas the path of
bhakti-yoga, the process of being in direct service to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, is easier and is natural for the embodied soul.
The individual soul is embodied since time immemorial. It is very
difficult for him to simply theoretically understand that he is not the
body. Therefore, the bhakti-yogi accepts the Deity of Krsna as
worshipable because there is some bodily conception fixed in the mind,
which can thus be applied. Of course, worshiping the Supreme
Personality of Godhead in His form within the temple is not idol
worship. There is evidence in the Vedic literature that worship may be
saguna and nirguna--of the Supreme possessing or not possessing
attributes. Worship of the Deity in the temple is saguna worship, for



the Lord is represented by material qualities. But the form of the
Lord, though represented by material qualities such as stone, wood or
oil paint, is not actually material. That is the absolute nature of the
Supreme Lord.
A crude example may be given here. We may find some mailboxes on the
street, and if we post our letters in those boxes, they will naturally
go to their destination without difficulty. But any old box, or an
imitation, which we may find somewhere, which is not authorized by the
post office, will not do the work. Similarly, God has an authorized
representation in the Deity form, which is called arca-vigraha. This
arca-vigraha is an incarnation of the Supreme Lord. God will accept
service through that form. The Lord is omnipotent and all-powerful;
therefore, by His incarnation as arca-vigraha, He can accept the
services of the devotee, just to make it convenient for the man in
conditioned life.
So, for a devotee, there is no difficulty in approaching the Supreme
immediately and directly, but for those who are following the
impersonal way to spiritual realization, the path is difficult. They
have to understand the unmanifested representation of the Supreme
through such Vedic literatures as the Upanisads, and they have to learn
the language, understand the nonperceptual feelings, and they have to
realize all these processes. This is not very easy for a common man. A
person in Krsna consciousness, engaged in devotional service, simply by
the guidance of the bona fide spiritual master, simply by offering
regulative obeisances unto the Deity, simply by hearing the glories of
the Lord, and simply by eating the remnants of foodstuffs offered to
the Lord, realizes the Supreme Personality of Godhead very easily.
There is no doubt that the impersonalists are unnecessarily taking a
troublesome path with the risk of not realizing the Absolute Truth at
the ultimate end. But the personalist, without any risk, trouble, or
difficulty, approaches the Supreme Personality directly. A similar
passage appears in Srimad-Bhagavatam. It is stated there that if one
ultimately has to surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead
(this surrendering process is called bhakti), but instead takes the
trouble to understand what is Brahman and what is not Brahman and
spends his whole life in that way, the result is simply troublesome.
Therefore it is advised here that one should not take up this
troublesome path of self-realization because there is uncertainty in
the ultimate result.
A living entity is eternally an individual soul, and if he wants to
merge into the spiritual whole, he may accomplish the realization of
the eternal and knowledgeable aspects of his original nature, but the
blissful portion is not realized. By the grace of some devotee, such a
transcendentalist, highly learned in the process of jnana-yoga, may
come to the point of bhakti-yoga, or devotional service. At that time,
long practice in impersonalism also becomes a source of trouble,
because he cannot give up the idea. Therefore an embodied soul is
always in difficulty with the unmanifest, both at the time of practice
and at the time of realization. Every living soul is partially
independent, and one should know for certain that this unmanifested
realization is against the nature of his spiritual blissful self. One
should not take up this process. For every individual living entity the
process of Krsna consciousness, which entails full engagement in
devotional service, is the best way. If one wants to ignore this
devotional service, there is the danger of turning to atheism. Thus
this process of centering attention on the unmanifested, the
inconceivable, which is beyond the approach of the senses, as already



expressed in this verse, should never be encouraged at any time,
especially in this age. It is not advised by Lord Krsna.

TEXTS 6-7

ye tu sarvani karmani
mayi sannyasya mat-parah
ananyenaiva yogena
mam dhyayanta upasate

tesam aham samuddharta
mrtyu-samsara-sagarat
bhavami na cirat partha
mayy avesita-cetasam

SYNONYMS

ye--one who; tu--but; sarvani--everything; karmani--activities; mayi--
unto Me; sannyasya--giving up; mat-parah--being attached to Me;
ananyena--without division; eva--certainly; yogena--by practice of such
bhakti-yoga; mam--unto Me; dhyayantah--meditating; upasate--worship;
tesam--of them; aham--I; samuddharta--deliverer; mrtyu--death; samsara-
-material existence; sagarat--from the ocean; bhavami--become; na
cirat--not a long time; partha--O son of Prtha; mayi--unto Me; avesita-
-fixed; cetasam--of those whose minds are like that.

TRANSLATION

For one who worships Me, giving up all his activities unto Me and being
devoted to Me without deviation, engaged in devotional service and
always meditating upon Me, who has fixed his mind upon Me, O son of
Prtha--for him I am the swift deliverer from the ocean of birth and
death.

PURPORT

It is explicitly stated here that the devotees are very fortunate to be
delivered very soon from material existence by the Lord. In pure
devotional service one comes to the realization that God is great and
that the individual soul is subordinate to Him. His duty is to render
service to the Lord--if not, then he will render service to maya.
As stated before, the Supreme Lord can only be appreciated by
devotional service. Therefore, one should be fully devoted. One should
fix his mind fully on Krsna in order to achieve Him. One should work
only for Krsna. It does not matter in what kind of work one engages,
but that work should be done only for Krsna. That is the standard of
devotional service. The devotee does not desire any achievement other
than pleasing the Supreme Personality of Godhead. His life's mission is
to please Krsna, and he can sacrifice everything for Krsna's
satisfaction, just as Arjuna did in the Battle of Kuruksetra. The
process is very simple: one can devote himself in his occupation and
engage at the same time in chanting Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna
Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. Such
transcendental chanting attracts the devotee to the Personality of
Godhead.
The Supreme Lord herein promises that He will without delay deliver a
pure devotee thus engaged from the ocean of material existence. Those
who are advanced in yoga practice can willfully transfer the soul to



whatever planet they like by the yoga process, and others take the
opportunity in various ways, but as far as the devotee is concerned, it
is clearly stated here that the Lord Himself takes him. He does not
need to wait to become very experienced in order to transfer himself to
the spiritual sky.
In the Varaha Purana this verse appears:

nayami paramam sthanam
arcir-adi-gatim vina
garuda-skandham aropya
yatheccham anivaritah

The purport of this verse is that a devotee does not need to practice
astanga-yoga in order to transfer his soul to the spiritual planets.
The responsibility is taken by the Supreme Lord Himself. He clearly
states here that He Himself becomes the deliverer. A child is
completely cared for by his parents, and thus his position is secure.
Similarly, a devotee does not need to endeavor to transfer himself by
yoga practice to other planets. Rather, the Supreme Lord, by His great
mercy, comes at once, riding on His bird carrier Garuda, and at once
delivers the devotee from this material existence. Although a man who
has fallen in the ocean may struggle very hard and may be very expert
in swimming, he cannot save himself. But if someone comes and picks him
up from the water, then he is easily rescued. Similarly, the Lord picks
up the devotee from this material existence. One simply has to practice
the easy process of Krsna consciousness and fully engage himself in
devotional service. Any intelligent man should always prefer the
process of devotional service to all other paths. In the Narayaniya
this is confirmed as follows:

ya vai sadhana-sampattih
purusartha-catustaye
taya vina tad apnoti
naro narayanasrayah

The purport of this verse is that one should not engage in the
different processes of fruitive activity or cultivate knowledge by the
mental speculative process. One who is devoted to the Supreme
Personality can attain all the benefits derived from other yogic
processes, speculation, rituals, sacrifices, charities, etc. That is
the specific benediction of devotional service.
Simply by chanting the holy name of Krsna--Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna,
Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare--a
devotee of the Lord can approach the supreme destination easily and
happily, but this destination cannot be approached by any other process
of religion.
The conclusion of Bhagavad-gita is stated in the Eighteenth Chapter:

sarva-dharman parityajya
mam ekam saranam vraja
aham tvam sarva-papebhyo
moksayisyami ma sucah

One should give up all other processes of self-realization and simply
execute devotional service in Krsna consciousness. That will enable one
to reach the highest perfection of life. There is no need for one to
consider the sinful actions of his past life because the Supreme Lord
fully takes charge of him. Therefore one should not futilely try to



deliver himself in spiritual realization. Let everyone take shelter of
the supreme omnipotent Godhead, Krsna. That is the highest perfection
of life.

TEXT 8

mayy eva mana adhatsva
mayi buddhim nivesaya
nivasisyasi mayy eva
ata urdhvam na samsayah

SYNONYMS

mayi--unto Me; eva--certainly; manah--mind; adhatsva--fix; mayi--upon
Me; buddhim--intelligence; nivesaya--apply; nivasisyasi--you live;
mayi--unto Me; eva--certainly; atah urdhvam--thereafter; na--never;
samsayah--doubt.

TRANSLATION

Just fix your mind upon Me, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and
engage all your intelligence in Me. Thus you will live with Me always,
without a doubt.

PURPORT

One who is engaged in Lord Krsna's devotional service lives in a direct
relationship with the Supreme Lord, so there is no doubt that his
position is transcendental from the very beginning. A devotee does not
live on the material plane--he lives in Krsna. The holy name of the
Lord and the Lord are nondifferent; therefore when a devotee chants
Hare Krsna, Krsna and His internal potency are dancing on the tongue of
the devotee. When he offers Krsna food, Krsna directly accepts these
eatables, and the devotee becomes Krsna-ized by eating the remnants.
One who does not engage in such service cannot understand how this is
so, although this is a process recommended in the Bhagavad-gita and in
other Vedic literatures.

TEXT 9

atha cittam samadhatum
na saknosi mayi sthiram
abhyasa-yogena tato
mam icchaptum dhananjaya

SYNONYMS

atha--if, therefore; cittam--mind; samadhatum--fixing; na--not;
saknosi--able; mayi--upon Me; sthiram--fixed; abhyasa--practice;
yogena--by devotional service; tatah--therefore; mam--Me; iccha--
desire; aptum--to get; dhanam-jaya--O Arjuna.

TRANSLATION

My dear Arjuna, O winner of wealth, if you cannot fix your mind upon Me
without deviation, then follow the regulative principles of bhakti-
yoga. In this way you will develop a desire to attain to Me.



PURPORT

In this verse, two different processes of bhakti-yoga are indicated.
The first applies to one who has actually developed an attachment for
Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by transcendental love. And
the other is for one who has not developed an attachment for the
Supreme Person by transcendental love. For this second class there are
different prescribed rules and regulations one can follow to be
ultimately elevated to the stage of attachment to Krsna.
Bhakti-yoga is the purification of the senses. At the present moment in
material existence the senses are always impure, being engaged in sense
gratification. But, by the practice of bhakti-yoga these senses can
become purified, and in the purified state they come directly in
contact with the Supreme Lord. In this material existence, I may be
engaged in some service to some master, but I don't really lovingly
serve my master. I simply serve to get some money. And the master also
is not in love; he takes service from me and pays me. So there is no
question of love. But for spiritual life, one must be elevated to the
pure stage of love. That stage of love can be achieved by practice of
devotional service, performed with the present senses.
This love of God is now in a dormant state in everyone's heart. And,
there, love of God is manifested in different ways, but it is
contaminated by material association. Now the material association has
to be purified, and that dormant, natural love for Krsna has to be
revived. That is the whole process.
To practice the regulative principles of bhakti-yoga one should, under
the guidance of an expert spiritual master, follow certain principles:
one should rise early in the morning, take bath, enter the temple and
offer prayers and chant Hare Krsna, then collect flowers to offer to
the Deity, cook foodstuffs to offer to the Deity, take prasadam, and so
on. There are various rules and regulations which one should follow.
And one should constantly hear Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam from
pure devotees. This practice can help anyone to rise to the level of
love of God, and then he is sure of his progress into the spiritual
kingdom of God. This practice of bhakti-yoga, under the rules and
regulations, with the direction of a spiritual master, will surely
bring one to the stage of love of God.

TEXT 10

abhyase 'py asamartho 'si
mat-karma-paramo bhava
mad-artham api karmani
kurvan siddhim avapsyasi

SYNONYMS

abhyase--in practice of; api--even; asamarthah--unable; asi--you are;
mat-karma--My work; paramah--supreme; bhava--you become; mat-artham--
for My sake; api--even though; karmani--work; kurvan--performing;
siddhim--perfection; avapsyasi--achieve.

TRANSLATION

If you cannot practice the regulations of bhakti-yoga, then just try to
work for Me, because by working for Me you will come to the perfect
stage.



PURPORT

One who is not able even to practice the regulative principles of
bhakti-yoga, under the guidance of a spiritual master, can still be
drawn to this perfectional stage by working for the Supreme Lord. How
to do this work has already been explained in the fifty-fifth verse of
the Eleventh Chapter. One should be sympathetic to the propagation of
Krsna consciousness. There are many devotees who are engaged in the
propagation of Krsna consciousness, and they require help. So, even if
one cannot directly practice the regulative principles of bhakti-yoga,
he can try to help such work. Every endeavor requires land, capital,
organization and labor. Just as in business one requires a place to
stay, some capital to use, some labor and some organization to expand,
so the same is required in the service of Krsna. The only difference is
that in materialism one works for sense gratification. The same work,
however, can be performed for the satisfaction of Krsna, and that is
spiritual activity. If one has sufficient money, he can help in
building an office or temple for propagating Krsna consciousness. Or he
can help with publications. There are various fields of activity, and
one should be interested in such activities. If one cannot sacrifice
the results of his activities, the same person can still sacrifice some
percentage to propagate Krsna consciousness. This voluntary service to
the cause of Krsna consciousness will help one rise to a higher state
of love for God, whereupon one becomes perfect.

TEXT 11

athaitad apy asakto 'si
kartum mad-yogam asritah
sarva-karma-phala-tyagam
tatah kuru yatatmavan

SYNONYMS

atha--even though; etat--this; api--also; asaktah--unable; asi--you
are; kartum--to perform; mat--unto Me; yogam--devotional service;
asritah--refuge; sarva-karma--all activities; phala--result; tyagam--
renunciation; tatah--therefore; kuru--do; yata-atma-van--self-situated.

TRANSLATION

If, however, you are unable to work in this consciousness, then try to
act giving up all results of your work and try to be self-situated.

PURPORT

It may be that one is unable to even sympathize with the activities of
Krsna consciousness because of social, familial or religious
considerations or because of some other impediments. If one attaches
himself directly to the activities of Krsna consciousness, there may be
objections from family members, or so many other difficulties. For one
who has such a problem, it is advised that he sacrifice the accumulated
result of his activities to some good cause. Such procedures are
described in the Vedic rules. There are many descriptions of sacrifices
and special functions of punya, or special work in which the result of
one's previous action may be applied. Thus one may gradually become
elevated to the state of knowledge. It is also found that when one who
is not even interested in the activities of Krsna consciousness gives



charity to some hospital or some other social institution, he gives up
the hard-earned results of his activities. That is also recommended
here because by the practice of giving up the fruits of one's
activities one is sure to purify his mind gradually, and in that
purified stage of mind one becomes able to understand Krsna
consciousness. Of course Krsna consciousness is not dependent on any
other experience, because Krsna consciousness itself can purify one's
mind, but if there are impediments to accepting Krsna consciousness,
one may try to give up the results of his actions. In that respect,
social service, community service, national service, sacrifice for
one's country, etc., may be accepted so that some day one may come to
the stage of pure devotional service to the Supreme Lord. In Bhagavad-
gita (18.46) we find it is stated, yatah pravrttir bhutanam: if one
decides to sacrifice for the supreme cause, even if he does not know
that the supreme cause is Krsna, he will come gradually to understand
that Krsna is the supreme cause by the sacrificial method.

TEXT 12

sreyo hi jnanam abhyasaj
jnanad dhyanam visisyate
dhyanat karma-phala-tyagas
tyagac chantir anantaram

SYNONYMS

sreyah--better; hi--certainly; jnanam--knowledge; abhyasat--by
practice; jnanat--better than knowledge; dhyanam--meditation;
visisyate--especially considered; dhyanat--from meditation; karma-
phala-tyagah--renunciation of the results of fruitive action; tyagat--
by such renunciation; santih--peace; anantaram--thereafter.

TRANSLATION

If you cannot take to this practice, then engage yourself in the
cultivation of knowledge. Better than knowledge, however, is
meditation, and better than meditation is renunciation of the fruits of
action, for by such renunciation one can attain peace of mind.

PURPORT

As mentioned in the previous verses, there are two kinds of devotional
service: the way of regulative principles and the way of full
attachment in love to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For those who
are actually not able to follow the principles of Krsna consciousness
it is better to cultivate knowledge because by knowledge one can be
able to understand his real position. Gradually knowledge will develop
to the point of meditation. By meditation one can be able to understand
the Supreme Personality of Godhead by a gradual process. There are
processes which make one understand that one himself is the Supreme,
and that sort of meditation is preferred if one is unable to engage in
devotional service. If one is not able to meditate in such a way, then
there are prescribed duties, as enjoined in the Vedic literature, for
the brahmanas, ksatriyas, vaisyas and sudras, which we shall find in a
later chapter of Bhagavad-gita. But in all cases, one should give up
the result or fruits of labor; this means to employ the result of karma
for some good cause.



In summary, to reach the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the highest
goal, there are two processes: one process is by gradual development,
and the other process is direct. Devotional service in Krsna
consciousness is the direct method, and the other method involves
renouncing the fruits of one's activities. Then one can come to the
stage of knowledge, then to the stage of meditation, then to the stage
of understanding the Supersoul, and then to the stage of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. One may either take the step by step process or
the direct path. The direct process is not possible for everyone;
therefore the indirect process is also good. It is, however, to be
understood that the indirect process is not recommended for Arjuna
because he is already at the stage of loving devotional service to the
Supreme Lord. It is for others who are not at this stage; for them the
gradual process of renunciation, knowledge, meditation and realization
of the Supersoul and Brahman should be followed. But as far as
Bhagavad-gita is concerned, it is the direct method that is stressed.
Everyone is advised to take to the direct method and surrender unto the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna.

TEXTS 13-14

advesta sarva-bhutanam
maitrah karuna eva ca
nirmamo nirahankarah
sama-duhkha-sukhah ksami

santustah satatam yogi
yatatma drdha-niscayah
mayy arpita-mano-buddhir
yo mad-bhaktah sa me priyah

SYNONYMS

advesta--nonenvious; sarva-bhutanam--for all living entities; maitrah--
friendly; karunah--kindly; eva--certainly; ca--also; nirmamah--with no
sense of proprietorship; nirahankarah--without false ego; sama--
equally; duhkha--distress; sukhah--happiness; ksami--forgiving;
santustah--satisfied; satatam--always; yogi--engaged in devotion; yata-
atma--self-controlled; drdha-niscayah--with determination; mayi--upon
Me; arpita--engaged; manah--mind; buddhih--intelligence; yah--one who;
mat-bhaktah--My devotee; sah me priyah--he is dear to Me.

TRANSLATION

One who is not envious but who is a kind friend to all living entities,
who does not think himself a proprietor, who is free from false ego and
equal both in happiness and distress, who is always satisfied and
engaged in devotional service with determination and whose mind and
intelligence are in agreement with Me--he is very dear to Me.

PURPORT

Coming again to the point of pure devotional service, the Lord is
describing the transcendental qualifications of a pure devotee in these
two verses. A pure devotee is never disturbed in any circumstances. Nor
is he envious of anyone. Nor does a devotee become his enemy's enemy;
he thinks that one is acting as his enemy due to his own past misdeeds.
Thus it is better to suffer than to protest. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam



(10.14.8) it is stated: tat te 'nukampam susamiksamano. Whenever a
devotee is in distress or has fallen into difficulty, he thinks that it
is the Lord's mercy upon him. He thinks: "Thanks to my past misdeeds I
should suffer far, far greater than I am suffering now. So it is by the
mercy of the Supreme Lord that I am not getting all the punishment I am
due. I am just getting a little, by the mercy of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead." Therefore he is always calm, quiet and
patient, despite many distressful conditions. A devotee is always kind
to everyone, even to his enemy. Nirmama means that a devotee does not
attach much importance to the pains and trouble pertaining to the body
because he knows perfectly well that he is not the material body. He
does not identify with the body; therefore he is freed from the
conception of false ego and is equipoised both in happiness and
distress. He is tolerant, and he is satisfied with whatever comes by
the grace of the Supreme Lord. He does not endeavor much to achieve
something with great difficulty; therefore he is always joyful. He is a
completely perfect mystic because he is fixed in the instructions
received from the spiritual master, and because his senses are
controlled, he is determined. He is not swayed by false argument
because no one can lead him from the fixed determination of devotional
service. He is fully conscious that Krsna is the eternal Lord, so no
one can disturb him. All his qualifications enable him to depend
entirely on the Supreme Lord. Such a standard of devotional service is
undoubtedly very rare, but a devotee becomes situated in that stage by
following the regulative principles of devotional service. Furthermore,
the Lord says that such a devotee is very dear to Him, for the Lord is
always pleased with all his activities in full Krsna consciousness.

TEXT 15

yasman nodvijate loko
lokan nodvijate ca yah
harsamarsa-bhayodvegair
mukto yah sa ca me priyah

SYNONYMS

yasmat--from whom; na--never; udvijate--agitates; lokah--persons;
lokat--persons; na--never; udvijate--disturbed; ca--also; yah--anyone;
harsa--happiness; amarsa--distress; bhaya--fear; udvegaih--with
anxiety; muktah--freed; yah--who; sah--anyone; ca--also; me--Mine;
priyah--very dear.

TRANSLATION

He for whom no one is put into difficulty and who is not disturbed by
anxiety, who is steady in happiness and distress, is very dear to Me.

PURPORT

A few of a devotee's qualifications are further being described. No one
is put into difficulty, anxiety, fearfulness or dissatisfaction by such
a devotee. Since a devotee is kind to everyone, he does not act in such
a way as to put others into anxiety. At the same time, if others try to
put a devotee into anxiety, he is not disturbed. It is by the grace of
the Lord that he is so practiced that he is not disturbed by any
outward disturbance. Actually because a devotee is always engrossed in
Krsna consciousness and engaged in devotional service, all such



material circumstances cannot woo him. Generally a materialistic person
becomes very happy when there is something for his sense gratification
and his body, but when he sees that others have something for their
sense gratification and he hasn't, he is sorry and envious. When he is
expecting some retaliation from an enemy, he is in a state of fear, and
when he cannot successfully execute something he becomes dejected. But
a devotee is always transcendental to all these disturbances; therefore
he is very dear to Krsna.

TEXT 16

anapeksah sucir daksa
udasino gata-vyathah
sarvarambha-parityagi
yo mad-bhaktah sa me priyah

SYNONYMS

anapeksah--neutral; sucih--pure; daksah--expert; udasinah--free from
care; gata-vyathah--freed from all distress; sarva-arambha--all
endeavors; parityagi--renouncer; yah--anyone; mat-bhaktah--My devotee;
sah--he; me--Me; priyah--very dear.

TRANSLATION

A devotee who is not dependent on the ordinary course of activities,
who is pure, expert, without cares, free from all pains, and who does
not strive for some result, is very dear to Me.

PURPORT

Money may be offered to a devotee, but he should not struggle to
acquire it. If automatically by the grace of the Supreme, money comes
to him, he is not agitated. Naturally a devotee takes bath at least
twice in a day and rises early in the morning for devotional service.
Thus he is naturally clean both inwardly and outwardly. A devotee is
always expert because he fully knows the essence of all activities of
life and he is convinced of the authoritative scriptures. A devotee
never takes the part of a particular party; therefore he is carefree.
He is never pained, because he is free from all designations; he knows
that his body is a designation, so if there are some bodily pains, he
is free. The pure devotee does not endeavor for anything which is
against the principles of devotional service. For example, constructing
a big building requires great energy, and a devotee does not take to
such business if it does not benefit him by advancing his devotional
service. He may construct a temple for the Lord, and for that he may
take all kinds of anxiety, but he does not construct a big house for
his personal relations.

TEXT 17

yo na hrsyati na dvesti
na socati na kanksati
subhasubha-parityagi
bhaktiman yah sa me priyah

SYNONYMS



yah--one who; na--never; hrsyati--takes pleasure; na--never; dvesti--
grieves; na--never; socati--laments; na--never; kanksati--desires;
subha--auspicious; asubha--inauspicious; parityagi--renouncer; bhakti-
man--devotee; yah--one who; sah--he is; me--Mine; priyah--dear.

TRANSLATION

One who neither grasps pleasure or grief, who neither laments nor
desires, and who renounces both auspicious and inauspicious things, is
very dear to Me.

PURPORT

A pure devotee is neither happy nor distressed over material gain and
loss, nor is he very much anxious to get a son or a disciple, nor is he
distressed by not getting them. If he loses anything which is very dear
to him, he does not lament. Similarly, if he does not get that which he
desires, he is not distressed. He is transcendental in the face of all
kinds of auspicious, inauspicious and sinful activities. He is prepared
to accept all kinds of risks for the satisfaction of the Supreme Lord.
Nothing is an impediment in the discharge of his devotional service.
Such a devotee is very dear to Krsna.

TEXTS 18-19

samah satrau ca mitre ca
tatha manapamanayoh
sitosna-sukha-duhkhesu
samah sanga-vivarjitah

tulya-ninda-stutir mauni
santusto yena kenacit
aniketah sthira-matir
bhaktiman me priyo narah

SYNONYMS

samah--equal; satrau--to the enemy; ca--also; mitre--to friends; ca--
also; tatha--so; mana--honor; apamanayoh--dishonor; sita--cold; usna--
heat; sukha--happiness; duhkhesu--distress; samah--equipoised; sanga-
vivarjitah--free from all association; tulya--equal; ninda--defamation;
stutih--repute; mauni--silent; santustah--satisfied; yena--somehow;
kena--or other; cit--if; aniketah--having no residence; sthira--fixed;
matih--determination; bhakti-man--engaged in devotion; me--My; priyah--
dear; narah--a man.

TRANSLATION

One who is equal to friends and enemies, who is equipoised in honor and
dishonor, heat and cold, happiness and distress, fame and infamy, who
is always free from contaminated association, always silent and
satisfied with anything, who doesn't care for any residence, who is
fixed in knowledge and engaged in devotional service, is very dear to
Me.

PURPORT



A devotee is always free from all bad association. Sometimes one is
praised and sometimes one is defamed; that is the nature of human
society. But a devotee is always transcendental to artificial fame and
infamy, distress or happiness. He is very patient. He does not speak of
anything but the topics about Krsna; therefore he is called silent.
Silent does not mean that one should not speak; silent means that one
should not speak nonsense. One should speak only of essentials, and the
most essential speech for the devotee is to speak of the Supreme Lord.
He is happy in all conditions; sometimes he may get very palatable
foodstuffs, sometimes not, but he is satisfied. Nor does he care for
any residential facility. He may sometimes live underneath a tree, and
he may sometimes live in a very palatial building; he is attracted to
neither. He is called fixed because he is fixed in his determination
and knowledge. We may find some repetition in the descriptions of the
qualifications of a devotee, but this is just to give an illustration
of the fact that a devotee must acquire all these qualifications.
Without good qualifications, one cannot be a pure devotee. Harav
abhaktasya kuto mahad-gunah: one who is not a devotee has no good
qualification. One who wants to be recognized as a devotee should
develop the good qualifications. Of course he does not extraneously
endeavor to acquire these qualifications, but engagement in Krsna
consciousness and devotional service automatically help him develop
them.

TEXT 20

ye tu dharmamrtam idam
yathoktam paryupasate
sraddadhana mat-parama
bhaktas te 'tiva me priyah

SYNONYMS

ye--one who; tu--but; dharma--of religion; amrtam--nectar; idam--this;
yatha--as; uktam--said; paryupasate--completely engage; sraddadhanah--
with faith; mat-paramah--taking the Supreme Lord as everything;
bhaktah--devotees; te--such persons; ativa--very, very; me--Me; priyah-
-dear.

TRANSLATION

He who follows this imperishable path of devotional service and who
completely engages himself with faith, making Me the supreme goal, is
very, very dear to Me.

PURPORT

In this chapter the religion of eternal engagement, the explanation of
the processes of transcendental service for approaching the Supreme
Lord, is given. This process is very dear to the Lord, and He accepts a
person who is engaged in such a process. The question who is better--
one who is engaged in the path of impersonal Brahman or one who is
engaged in the personal service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead--
was raised by Arjuna, and the Lord replied to him so explicitly that
there is no doubt that devotional service to the Personality of Godhead
is the best of all processes of spiritual realization. In other words,
in this chapter it is decided that through good association, one
develops attachment for pure devotional service and thereby accepts a



bona fide spiritual master and from him begins to hear and chant and
observe the regulative principles of devotional service with faith,
attachment and devotion and thus becomes engaged in the transcendental
service of the Lord. This path is recommended in this chapter;
therefore there is no doubt that devotional service is the only
absolute path for self-realization, for the attainment of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The impersonal conception of the Supreme
Absolute Truth, as described in this chapter, is recommended only up to
the time one surrenders himself for self-realization. In other words,
as long as one does not have the chance to associate with a pure
devotee, the impersonal conception may be beneficial. In the impersonal
conception of the Absolute Truth one works without fruitive result,
meditates and cultivates knowledge to understand spirit and matter.
This is necessary as long as one is not in the association of a pure
devotee. Fortunately, if one develops directly a desire to engage in
Krsna consciousness in pure devotional service, he does not need to
undergo step by step improvements in spiritual realization. Devotional
service, as described in the middle six chapters of the Bhagavad-gita,
is more congenial. One need not bother about materials to keep body and
soul together because by the grace of the Lord everything is carried
out automatically.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Twelfth Chapter of the
Srimad Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Devotional Service.

Chapter 13
Nature, the Enjoyer, and Consciousness

TEXTS 1-2

arjuna uvaca
prakrtim purusam caiva
ksetram ksetra-jnam eva ca
etad veditum icchami
jnanam jneyam ca kesava

sri-bhagavan uvaca
idam sariram kaunteya
ksetram ity abhidhiyate
etad yo vetti tam prahuh
ksetra-jna iti tad-vidah

SYNONYMS

arjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; prakrtim--nature; purusam--the enjoyer; ca-
-also; eva--certainly; ksetram--body; ksetra-jnam--knower of the body;
eva--certainly; ca--also; etat--all this; veditum--to understand;
icchami--I wish; jnanam--knowledge; jneyam--the object of knowledge;
ca--also; kesava--O Krsna; sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Personality of
Godhead said; idam--this; sariram--body; kaunteya--O son of Kunti;
ksetram--the field; iti--thus; abhidhiyate--is called; etat--this; yah-
-anyone; vetti--knows; tam--he; prahuh--is called; ksetra-jnah--knower
of the body; iti--thus; tat-vidah--one who knows.

TRANSLATION



Arjuna said: O my dear Krsna, I wish to know about prakrti [nature],
purusa [the enjoyer], and the field and the knower of the field, and of
knowledge and of the end of knowledge.
The Blessed Lord said: This body, O son of Kunti, is called the field,
and one who knows this body is called the knower of the field.

PURPORT

Arjuna was inquisitive about prakrtil, or nature, purusa, the enjoyer,
ksetra, the field, ksetra-jna, its knower, and of knowledge and the
object of knowledge. When he inquired about all these, Krsna said that
this body is called the field and that one who knows this body is
called the knower of the field. This body is the field of activity for
the conditioned soul. The conditioned soul is entrapped in material
existence, and he attempts to lord over material nature. And so,
according to his capacity to dominate material nature, he gets a field
of activity. That field of activity is the body. And what is the body?
The body is made of senses. The conditioned soul wants to enjoy sense
gratification, and, according to his capacity to enjoy sense
gratification, he is offered a body, or field of activity. Therefore
the body is called ksetra, or the field of activity for the conditioned
soul. Now, the person who identifies himself with the body, is called
ksetra-jna, the knower of the field. It is not very difficult to
understand the difference between the field and its knower, the body
and the knower of the body. Any person can consider that from childhood
to old age he undergoes so many changes of body and yet is still one
person, remaining. Thus there is a difference between the knower of the
field of activities and the actual field of activities. A living
conditioned soul can thus understand that he is different from the
body. It is described in the beginning--dehino 'smin--that the living
entity is within the body and that the body is changing from childhood
to boyhood and from boyhood to youth and from youth to old age, and the
person who owns the body knows that the body is changing. The owner is
distinctly ksetra-jna. Sometimes we understand that, "I am happy," "I
am a man," "I am a woman," "I am a dog," "I am a cat." These are the
bodily designations of the knower. But the knower is different from the
field. Although we use many articles--our clothes, etc.--we know that
we are different from the things used. Similarly, we also understand by
a little contemplation that we are different from the body.
In the first six chapters of Bhagavad-gita the knower of the body, the
living entity, and the position by which he can understand the Supreme
Lord are described. In the middle six chapters of the Gita, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and the relationship between the individual soul
and the Supersoul in regard to devotional service are described. The
superior position of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the
subordinate position of the individual soul are definitely defined in
these chapters. The living entities are subordinate under all
circumstances, but in their forgetfulness they are suffering. When
enlightened by pious activities, they approach the Supreme Lord in
different capacities--as the distressed, those in want of money, the
inquisitive, and those in search of knowledge. That is also described.
Now, starting with the Thirteenth Chapter, how the living entity comes
in contact with material nature, how he is delivered by the Supreme
Lord through the different methods of fruitive activities, cultivation
of knowledge, and the discharge of devotional service are explained.
Although the living entity is completely different from the material
body, he somehow becomes related. This also is explained.



TEXT 3

ksetra-jnam capi mam viddhi
sarva-ksetresu bharata
ksetra-ksetrajnayor jnanam
yat taj jnanam matam mama

SYNONYMS

ksetra-jnam--the knower; ca--also; api--certainly; mam--Me; viddhi--
know; sarva--all; ksetresu--in bodily fields; bharata--O son of
Bharata; ksetra--field of activities (the body); ksetra-jnayoh--the
knower of the field; jnanam--knowledge; yat--that which is taught; tat-
-that; jnanam--knowledge; matam--opinion; mama--that.

TRANSLATION

O scion of Bharata, you should understand that I am also the knower in
all bodies, and to understand this body and its knower is called
knowledge. That is My opinion.

PURPORT

While discussing the subject of this body and the knower of the body,
the soul and the Supersoul, we shall find three different topics of
study: the Lord, the living entity, and matter. In every field of
activities, in every body, there are two souls: the individual soul and
the Supersoul. Because the Supersoul is the plenary expansion of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, Krsna says, "I am also the
knower, but I am not the individual knower of the body. I am the
superknower. I am present in every body as the Paramatma, or
Supersoul."
One who studies the subject matter of the field of activity and the
knower of the field very minutely, in terms of this Bhagavad-gita, can
attain to knowledge.
The Lord says, "I am the knower of the field of activities in every
individual body." The individual may be the knower of his own body, but
he is not in knowledge of other bodies. The Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who is present as the Supersoul in all bodies, knows
everything about all bodies. He knows all the different bodies of all
the various species of life. A citizen may know everything about his
patch of land, but the king knows not only his palace but also all the
properties possessed by the individual citizens. Similarly, one may be
the proprietor of the body individually, but the Supreme Lord is the
proprietor of all bodies. The king is the original proprietor of the
kingdom, and the citizen is the secondary proprietor. Similarly, the
Supreme Lord is the supreme proprietor of all bodies.
The body consists of the senses. The Supreme Lord is Hrsikesa, Which
means "the controller of the senses." He is the original controller of
the senses, just as the king is the original controller of all the
activities of the state; the citizens are secondary controllers. The
Lord says, "I am also the knower." This means that He is the
superknower; the individual soul knows only his particular body. In the
Vedic literature, it is stated as follows:

ksetrani hi sarirani
bijam capi subhasubhe
tani vetti sa yogatma



tatah ksetra-jna ucyate

This body is called the ksetra, and within it dwells the owner of the
body and the Supreme Lord who knows both the body and the owner of the
body. Therefore He is called the knower of all fields. The distinction
between the field of activities, the knower of activities, and the
supreme knower of activities is described as follows. Perfect knowledge
of the constitution of the body, the constitution of the individual
soul, and the constitution of the Supersoul is known in terms of Vedic
literature as jnana. That is the opinion of Krsna. To understand both
the soul and the Supersoul as one yet distinct is knowledge. One who
does not understand the field of activity and the knower of activity is
not in perfect knowledge. One has to understand the position of
prakrti, nature, purusa, the enjoyer of the nature, and isvara, the
knower who dominates or controls nature and the individual soul. One
should not confuse the three in their different capacities. One should
not confuse the painter, the painting and the easel. This material
world, which is the field of activities, is nature, and the enjoyer of
nature is the living entity, and above them both is the supreme
controller, the Personality of Godhead. It is stated in the Vedic
language (in the Svetasvatara Upanisad 1.12), bhokta bhogyam preritaram
ca matva. sarvam proktam tri vidham-brahmam etat. There are three
Brahman conceptions: prakrti is Brahman as the field of activities, and
the jiva (individual soul) is also Brahman and is trying to control
material nature, and the controller of both of them is also Brahman,
but He is the factual controller.
In this chapter it will be also explained that out of the two knowers,
one is fallible and the other is infallible. One is superior and the
other is subordinate. One who understands the two knowers of the field
to be one and the same contradicts the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who states here very clearly, "I am also the knower of the field of
activity." One who misunderstands a rope to be a serpent is not in
knowledge. There are different kinds of bodies, and there are different
owners of the bodies. Because each individual soul has his individual
capacity for lording it over material nature, there are different
bodies. But the Supreme also is present in them as the controller. The
word ca is significant for it indicates the total number of bodies.
That is the opinion of Srila Baladeva Vidyabhusana: Krsna is the
Supersoul present in each and every body apart from the individual
soul. And Krsna explicitly says here that the Supersoul is the
controller of both the field of activities and the finite enjoyer.

TEXT 4

tat ksetram yac ca yadrk ca
yad-vikari yatas ca yat
sa ca yo yat-prabhavas ca
tat samasena me srnu

SYNONYMS

tat--that; ksetram--field of activities; yat--as; ca--also; yadrk--as
it is; ca--also; yat--what is; vikari--changes; yatah--from which; ca--
also; yat--which; sah--he; ca--also; yah--one; yat--which; prabhavah
ca--influence also; tat--that; samasena--in summary; me--from Me; srnu-
-understand.

TRANSLATION



Now please hear My brief description of this field of activity and how
it is constituted, what its changes are, whence it is produced, who
that knower of the field of activities is, and what his influences are.

PURPORT

The Lord is describing the field of activities and the knower of the
field of activities in their constitutional positions. One has to know
how this body is constituted, the materials of which this body is made,
under whose control this body is working, how the changes are taking
place, wherefrom the changes are coming, what the causes are, what the
reasons are, what the ultimate goal of the individual soul is, and what
the actual form of the individual soul is. One should also know the
distinction between the individual living soul and the Supersoul, their
different influences, their potentials, etc. One just has to understand
this Bhagavad-gita directly from the description given by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and all this will be clarified. But one should
be careful not to consider the Supreme Personality of Godhead in every
body and individual soul to be the jiva. This is something like
equalizing the potent and the impotent.

TEXT 5

rsibhir bahudha gitam
chandobhir vividhaih prthak
brahma-sutra-padais caiva
hetumadbhir viniscitaih

SYNONYMS

rsibhih--by the wise sages; bahudha--in many ways; gitam--described;
chandobhih--Vedic hymns; vividhaih--in various; prthak--variously;
brahma-sutra--the Vedanta; padaih--aphorisms; ca--also; eva--certainly;
hetu-madbhih--with cause and effect; viniscitaih--ascertain.

TRANSLATION

That knowledge of the field of activities and of the knower of
activities is described by various sages in various Vedic writings--
especially in the Vedanta-sutra--and is presented with all reasoning as
to cause and effect.

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, is the highest authority in
explaining this knowledge. Still, as a matter of course, learned
scholars and standard authorities always give evidence from previous
authorities. Krsna is explaining this most controversial point
regarding the duality and nonduality of the soul and the Supersoul by
referring to the scriptures, the Vedanta, which are accepted as
authority. First, He says, "This is according to different sages." As
far as the sages are concerned, besides Himself, Vyasadeva, the author
of the Vedanta-sutra, is a great sage, and in the Vedanta-sutra duality
is perfectly explained. And Vyasadeva's father, Parasara, was also a
great sage, and he writes in his books of religiosity: aham tvam ca
tathanye... "we--you, I and the various other living entities--are all
transcendental, although in material bodies. Now we are fallen into the



ways of the three modes of material nature according to our different
karma. As such, some are on higher levels, and some are in the lower
nature. The higher and lower natures exist due to ignorance and are
being manifested in an infinite number of living entities. But the
Supersoul, which is infallible, is uncontaminated by the three
qualities of nature and is transcendental." Similarly, in the original
Vedas, a distinction between the soul, the Supersoul and the body is
made, especially in the Katha Upanisad.
There is a manifestation of the Supreme Lord's energy known as anna-
maya, by which one depends simply upon food for existence. This is a
materialistic realization of the Supreme. Then there is prana-maya;
this means that after realizing the Supreme Absolute Truth in
foodstuff, one can realize the Absolute Truth in the living symptoms,
or life forms. In jnana-maya the living symptom develops to the point
of thinking, feeling and willing. Then there is Brahman realization and
realization called vijnana-maya by which the living entity's mind and
life symptoms are distinguished from the living entity himself. The
next and supreme stage is ananda-maya, realization of the all-blissful
nature. Thus there are five stages of Brahman realization, which are
called brahma puccham. Out of these the first three--anna-maya, prana-
maya and jnana-maya--involve the fields of activities of the living
entities. Transcendental to all these fields of activities is the
Supreme Lord, who is called ananda-maya. In the Vedanta-sutra also the
Supreme is called, ananda-mayo 'bhyasat: the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is by nature full of joy, and to enjoy His transcendental
bliss, He expands into vijnana-maya, prana-maya, jnana-maya, and anna-
maya. In this field of activities the living entity is considered to be
the enjoyer, and different from him is the ananda-maya. That means that
if the living entity decides to enjoy, in dovetailing himself with the
ananda-maya, then he becomes perfect. This is the real picture of the
Supreme Lord, as the supreme knower of the field, the living entity as
the subordinate knower, and the nature of the field of activities.

TEXTS 6-7

maha-bhutany ahankaro
buddhir avyaktam eva ca
indriyani dasaikam ca
panca cendriya-gocarah

iccha dvesah sukham duhkham
sanghatas cetana dhrtih
etat ksetram samasena
sa-vikaram udahrtam

SYNONYMS

maha-bhutani--great elements; ahankarah--false ego; buddhih--
intelligence; avyaktam--the unmanifested; eva--certainly; ca--also;
indriyani--senses; dasa-ekam--eleven; ca--also; panca--five; ca--also;
indriya-go-carah--objects of the senses; iccha--desire; dvesah--hatred;
sukham--happiness; duhkham--distress; sanghatah--the aggregate; cetana-
-living symptoms; dhrtih--conviction; etat--all this; ksetram--the
field of activities; samasena--in summary; sa-vikaram--interaction;
udahrtam--exemplified.

TRANSLATION



The five great elements, false ego, intelligence, the unmanifested, the
ten senses, the mind, the five sense objects, desire, hatred,
happiness, distress, the aggregate, the life symptoms, and convictions-
-all these are considered, in summary, to be the field of activities
and its interactions.

PURPORT

From all the authoritative statements of the great sages, the Vedic
hymns and the aphorisms of the Vedanta-sutra, the components of this
world are earth, water, fire, air and ether. These are the five great
elements (maha-bhuta). Then there are false ego, intelligence and the
unmanifested stage of the three modes of nature. Then there are five
senses for acquiring knowledge: the eyes, ears, nose, tongue and touch.
Then five working senses: voice, legs, hands, anus and genitals. Then,
above the senses, there is the mind, which is within and which can be
called the sense within. Therefore, including the mind, there are
eleven senses altogether. Then there are the five objects of the
senses: smell, taste, form, touch and sound. Now the aggregate of these
twenty-four elements is called the field of activity. If one makes an
analytical study of these twenty-four subjects, then he can very well
understand the field of activity. Then there is desire, hatred,
pleasure and pain, which are interactions, representations of the five
great elements in the gross body. The living symptoms, represented by
consciousness and conviction, are the manifestation of the subtle body-
-the mind, ego and intelligence. These subtle elements are included
within the field of activities.
The five great elements are a gross representation of the subtle false
ego. They are a representation in the material conception.
Consciousness is represented by intelligence, of which the unmanifested
stage is the three modes of material nature. The unmanifested three
modes of material nature is called pradhana.
One who desires to know the twenty-four elements in detail along with
their interactions should study the philosophy in more detail. In
Bhagavad-gita, a summary only is given.
The body is the representation of all these factors, and there are
changes of the body, which are six in number: the body is born, it
grows, it stays, it produces by-products, then it begins to decay, and
at the last stage it vanishes. Therefore the field is a nonpermanent
material thing. However, the ksetra-jna, the knower of the field, its
proprietor, is different.

TEXTS 8-12

amanitvam adambhitvam
ahimsa ksantir arjavam
acaryopasanam saucam
sthairyam atma-vinigrahah

indriyarthesu vairagyam
anahankara eva ca
janma-mrtyu-jara-vyadhi-
duhkha-dosanudarsanam

asaktir anabhisvangah
putra-dara-grhadisu
nityam ca sama-cittatvam
istanistopapattisu



mayi cananya-yogena
bhaktir avyabhicarini
vivikta-desa-sevitvam
aratir jana-samsadi

adhyatma-jnana-nityatvam
tattva-jnanartha-darsanam
etaj jnanam iti proktam
ajnanam yad ato 'nyatha

SYNONYMS

amanitvam--humility; adambhitvam--pridelessness; ahimsa--nonviolence;
ksantih--tolerance; arjavam--simplicity; acarya-upasanam--approaching a
bona fide spiritual master; saucam--cleanliness; sthairyam--
steadfastness; atma-vinigrahah--control; indriya-arthesu--in the matter
of the senses; vairagyam--renunciation; anahankarah--being without
false egoism; eva--certainly; ca--also; janma--birth; mrtyu--death;
jara--old age; vyadhi--disease; duhkha--distress; dosa--fault;
anudarsanam--observing; asaktih--without attachment; anabhisvangah--
without association; putra--sons; dara--wife; grha-adisu--home, etc.;
nityam--eternal; ca--also; sama-cittatvam--equilibrium; ista--
desirable; anista--undesirable; upapattisu--having obtained; mayi--unto
Me; ca--also; ananya-yogena--by devotional service; bhaktih--devotion;
avyabhicarini--constant, unalloyed; vivikta--solitary; desa--place;
sevitvam--aspiring; aratih--without attachment; jana--to people in
general; samsadi--mass; adhyatma--pertaining to the self; jnana--
knowledge; nityatvam--eternity; tattva-jnana--knowledge of the truth;
artha--the object; darsanam--philosophy; etat--all this; jnanam--
knowledge; iti--thus; proktam--declared; ajnanam--ignorance; yat--that
which; atah--from this; anyatha--others.

TRANSLATION

Humility, pridelessness, nonviolence, tolerance, simplicity,
approaching a bona fide spiritual master, cleanliness, steadiness and
self-control; renunciation of the objects of sense gratification;
absence of false ego, the perception of the evil of birth, death, old
age and disease; nonattachment to children, wife, home and the rest and
even-mindedness amid pleasant and unpleasant events; constant and
unalloyed devotion to Me, resorting to solitary places, detachment from
the general mass of people; accepting the importance of self-
realization, and philosophical search for the Absolute Truth--all these
I thus declare to be knowledge and what is contrary to these is
ignorance.

PURPORT

This process of knowledge is sometimes misunderstood by less
intelligent men as being the interaction of the field of activity. But
actually this is the real process of knowledge. If one accepts this
process, then the possibility of approaching the Absolute Truth exists.
This is not the interaction of the twenty-four elements, as described
before. This is actually the means to get out of it. Of all the
descriptions of the process of knowledge, the most important point is
described in the first line of the eleventh verse. Mayi cananya-yogena
bhaktir avyabhicarini: the process of knowledge terminates in unalloyed



devotional service to the Lord. So, if one does not approach, or is not
able to approach, the transcendental service of the Lord, then the
other nineteen items are of no particular value. But, if one takes to
devotional service in full Krsna consciousness, the other nineteen
items automatically develop within him. The principle of accepting a
spiritual master, as mentioned in the eighth verse, is essential. Even
for one who takes to devotional service, it is most important.
Transcendental life begins when one accepts a bona fide spiritual
master. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, clearly states
here that this process of knowledge is the actual path. Anything
speculated beyond this is nonsense.
As for the knowledge outlined here, the items may be analyzed as
follows: Humility means that one should not be anxious to have the
satisfaction of being honored by others. The material conception of
life makes us very eager to receive honor from others, but from the
point of view of a man in perfect knowledge--who knows that he is not
this body--anything, honor or dishonor, pertaining to this body is
useless. One should not be hankering after this material deception.
People are very anxious to be famous for their religion, and
consequently sometimes it is found that without understanding the
principles of religion, one enters into some group, which is not
actually following religious principles, and then wants to advertise
himself as a religious mentor. As for actual advancement in spiritual
science, one should have a test to see how far he is progressing. He
can judge by these items.
Nonviolence is generally taken to mean not killing or destroying the
body, but actually nonviolence means not to put others into distress.
People in general are trapped by ignorance in the material concept of
life, and they perpetually suffer material pains. So, unless one
elevates people to spiritual knowledge, one is practicing violence. One
should try his best to distribute real knowledge to the people, so that
they may become enlightened and leave this material entanglement. That
is nonviolence.
Tolerance means that one should be practiced to bear insult and
dishonor from others. If one is engaged in the advancement of spiritual
knowledge, there will be so many insults and so much dishonor from
others. This is expected because material nature is so constituted.
Even a boy like Prahlada, who, only five years old, was engaged in the
cultivation of spiritual knowledge, was endangered when his father
became antagonistic to his devotion. The father tried to kill him in so
many ways, but Prahlada tolerated him. So, for making advancement in
spiritual knowledge,  there may be many impediments, but we should be
tolerant and continue our progress with determination.
Simplicity means that without diplomacy one should be so straight-
forward that he can disclose the real truth even to an enemy. As for
acceptance of the spiritual master, that is essential, because without
the instruction of a bona fide spiritual master, one cannot progress in
the spiritual science. One should approach the spiritual master with
all humility and offer him all services so that he will be pleased to
bestow his blessings upon the disciple. Because a bona fide spiritual
master is a representative of Krsna, if he bestows any blessings upon
his disciple, that will make the disciple immediately advanced without
the disciple's following the regulative principles. Or, the regulative
principles will be easier for one who has served the spiritual master
without reservation.
Cleanliness is essential for making advancement in spiritual life.
There are two kinds of cleanliness: external and internal. External
cleanliness means taking a bath, but for internal cleanliness, one has



to think of Krsna always and chant Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna,
Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. This process
cleans the accumulated dust of past karma from the mind.
Steadiness means that one should be very determined to make progress in
spiritual life. Without such determination, one cannot make tangible
progress. And self-control means that one should not accept anything
which is detrimental to the path of spiritual progress. One should
become accustomed to this and reject anything which is against the path
of spiritual progress. This is real renunciation. The senses are so
strong that they are always anxious to have sense gratification. One
should not cater to these demands, which are not necessary. The senses
should only be gratified to keep the body fit so that one can discharge
his duty in advancing in spiritual life. The most important and
uncontrollable sense is the tongue. If one can control the tongue, then
there is every possibility of controlling the other senses. The
function of the tongue is to taste and to vibrate. Therefore, by
systematic regulation, the tongue should always be engaged in tasting
the remnants of foodstuffs offered to Krsna and chanting Hare Krsna. As
far as the eyes are concerned, they should not be allowed to see
anything but the beautiful form of Krsna. That will control the eyes.
Similarly, the ears should be engaged in hearing about Krsna and the
nose in smelling the flowers offered to Krsna. This is the process of
devotional service, and it is understood here that Bhagavad-gita is
simply expounding the science of devotional service. Devotional service
is the main and sole objective. Unintelligent commentators on the
Bhagavad-gita try to divert the mind of the reader to other subjects,
but there is no other subject in Bhagavad-gita than devotional service.
False ego means accepting this body as oneself. When one understands
that he is not his body and is spirit soul, that is real ego. Ego is
there. False ego is condemned, but not real ego. In the Vedic
literature (Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 1.4.10) it is said, aham brahmasmi:
I am Brahman, I am spirit. This "I am," the sense of self, also exists
in the liberated stage of self-realization. This sense of "I am" is
ego, but when the sense of "I am" is applied to this false body it is
false ego. When the sense of self is applied to reality, that is real
ego. There are some philosophers who say we should give up our ego, but
we cannot give up our ego, because ego means identity. We ought, of
course, to give up the false identification with the body.
One should try to understand the distress of accepting birth, death,
old age and disease. There are descriptions in various Vedic
literatures of birth. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam the world of the unborn,
the child's stay in the womb of the mother, its suffering, etc., are
all very graphically described. It should be thoroughly understood that
birth is distressful. Because we forget how much distress we have
suffered within the womb of the mother, we do not make any solution to
the repetition of birth and death. Similarly at the time of death there
are all kinds of sufferings, and they are also mentioned in the
authoritative scriptures. These should be discussed. And as far as
disease and old age are concerned, everyone gets practical experience.
No one wants to be diseased, and no one wants to become old, but there
is no avoiding these. Unless we have a pessimistic view of this
material life, considering the distresses of birth, death, old age and
disease, there is no impetus for our making advancement in spiritual
life.
As for detachment from children, wife and home, it is not meant that
one should have no feeling for these. They are natural objects of
affection. But when they are not favorable to spiritual progress, then
one should not be attached to them. The best process for making the



home pleasant is Krsna consciousness. If one is in full Krsna
consciousness, he can make his home very happy, because this process of
Krsna consciousness is very easy. One need only chant Hare Krsna, Hare
Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare
Hare, accept the remnants of foodstuffs offered to Krsna, have some
discussion on books like Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam, and
engage oneself in Deity worship. These four will make one happy. One
should train the members of his family in this way. The family members
can sit down morning and evening and chant together Hare Krsna, Hare
Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare
Hare. If one can mold his family life in this way to develop Krsna
consciousness, following these four principles, then there is no need
to change from family life to renounced life. But if it is not
congenial, not favorable for spiritual advancement, then family life
should be abandoned. One must sacrifice everything to realize or serve
Krsna, just as Arjuna did. Arjuna did not want to kill his family
members, but when he understood that these family members were
impediments to his Krsna realization, he accepted the instruction of
Krsna and fought and killed them. In all cases, one should be detached
from the happiness and distress of family life, because in this world
one can never be fully happy or fully miserable.
Happiness and distress are concomitant factors of material life. One
should learn to tolerate, as advised in Bhagavad-gita. One can never
restrict the coming and going of happiness and distress, so one should
be detached from the materialistic way of life and be automatically
equipoised in both cases. Generally, when we get something desirable,
we are very happy, and when we get something undesirable, we are
distressed. But if we are actually in the spiritual position, these
things will not agitate us. To reach that stage, we have to practice
unbreakable devotional service; Devotional service to Krsna without
deviation means engaging oneself in the nine processes of devotional
service, chanting, hearing, worshiping, offering respect, etc., as
described in the last verse of the Ninth Chapter. That process should
be followed.
Naturally, when one is adapted to the spiritual way of life, he will
not want to mix with materialistic men. That would go against his
grain. One may test himself by seeing how far he is inclined to live in
a solitary place without unwanted association. Naturally a devotee has
no taste for unnecessary sporting or cinema-going or enjoying some
social function, because he understands that these are simply a waste
of time. There are many research scholars and philosophers who study
sex life or some other subject, but according to Bhagavad-gita, such
research work and philosophical speculation have no value. That is more
or less nonsensical. According to Bhagavad-gita, one should make
research, by philosophical discretion into the nature of the soul. One
should make research to understand with what the self is concerned.
That is recommended here.
As far as self-realization is concerned, it is clearly stated here that
bhakti-yoga is especially practical. As soon as there is a question of
devotion, one must consider the relationship between the Supersoul and
the individual soul. The individual soul and the Supersoul cannot be
one, at least not in the bhakti conception, the devotional conception
of life. This service of the individual soul to the Supreme Soul is
eternal, nityam, as it is clearly stated. So bhakti or devotional
service is eternal. One should be established in that philosophical
conviction, otherwise it is only a waste of time, ignorance.
In the Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.2.11) this is explained; vadanti tat
tattva-vidas tattvam yaj jnanam advayam. "Those who are actually



knowers of the Absolute Truth know that the Self is realized in three
different phases, as Brahman, Paramatma and Bhagavan." Bhagavan is the
last word in the realization of the Absolute Truth; therefore one
should reach up to that platform of understanding the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and thus engage in the devotional service of the
Lord. That is perfection of knowledge.
Beginning from practicing humility up to the point of realization of
the Supreme Truth, the Absolute Personality of Godhead, this process is
just like a staircase beginning from the ground floor up to the top
floor. Now on this staircase there are so many people who have reached
the first floor, or the second or the third floor, etc., but unless one
reaches the top floor, which is the understanding of Krsna, he is at a
lower stage of knowledge. If anyone wants to compete with God and at
the same time make advancement in spiritual knowledge, he will be
frustrated. It is clearly stated that without humility understanding is
harmful. To think oneself God is most puffed up. Although the living
entity is always being kicked by the stringent laws of material nature,
still he thinks, "I am God" because of ignorance. One should be humble
and know that he is subordinate to the Supreme Lord. Due to rebellion
against the Supreme Lord, one becomes subordinate to material nature.
One must know and be convinced of this truth.

TEXT 13

jneyam yat tat pravaksyami
yaj jnatvamrtam asnute
anadi mat-param brahma
na sat tan nasad ucyate

SYNONYMS

jneyam--knowable; yat--that; tat--which; pravaksyami--I shall now
explain; yat--which; jnatva--knowing; amrtam--nectar; asnute--taste;
anadi--beginningless; mat-param--subordinate to Me; brahma--spirit; na-
-neither; sat--cause; tat--that; na--nor; asat--effect; ucyate--is
called.

TRANSLATION

I shall now explain the knowable, knowing which you will taste the
eternal. This is beginningless, and it is subordinate to Me. It is
called Brahman, the spirit, and it lies beyond the cause and effect of
this material world.

PURPORT

The Lord has explained the field of activities and the knower of the
field. He has also explained the process of knowing the knower of the
field of activities. Now He is explaining the knowable, both the soul
and the Supersoul respectively. By knowledge of the knower, both the
soul and the Supersoul, one can relish the nectar of life. As explained
in the Second Chapter, the living entity is eternal. This is also
confirmed here. There is no specific date at which the jiva was born.
Nor can anyone trace out the history of the jivatma's manifestation
from the Supreme Lord. Therefore it is beginningless. The Vedic
literature confirms this: na jayate mriyate va vipascit (Katha Upanisad
1.2.18). The knower of the body is never born and never dies, and he is
full of knowledge.



The Supreme Lord is also stated in the Vedic literature (Svetasvatara
Upanisad 6.16) as pradhana-ksetrajna-patir gunesah. The Supreme Lord as
the Supersoul is the chief knower of the body and He is the master of
the three modes of material nature. In the smrti it is said: dasa-bhuto
harer eva nanyasvaiva kadacana. The living entities are eternally in
the service of the Supreme Lord. This is also confirmed by Lord
Caitanya in His teachings; therefore the description of Brahman
mentioned in this verse is in relation to the individual soul, and when
the word Brahman is applied to the living entity, it is to be
understood that he is vijnana-brahma as opposed to ananda-brahma.
Ananda-brahma is the Supreme Brahman Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 14

sarvatah pani-padam tat
sarvato 'ksi-siro-mukham
sarvatah srutimal loke
sarvam avrtya tisthati

SYNONYMS

sarvatah--everywhere; pani--hands; padam--legs; tat--that; sarvatah--
everywhere; aksi--eyes; sirah--head; mukham--face; sarvatah--
everywhere; sruti-mat--hearing; loke--in the world; sarvam--everything;
avrtya--covering; tisthati--exists.

TRANSLATION

Everywhere are His hands and legs, His eyes and faces, and He hears
everything. In this way the Supersoul exists.

PURPORT

As the sun exists diffusing its unlimited rays, so does the Supersoul,
or Supreme Personality of Godhead. He exists in His all-pervading form,
and in Him exist all the individual living entities, beginning from the
first great teacher, Brahma, down to the small ants. There are
unlimited heads, legs, hands and eyes, and unlimited living entities.
All are existing in and on the Supersoul. Therefore the Supersoul is
all-pervading. The individual soul, however, cannot say that he has his
hands, legs and eyes everywhere. That is not possible. If he thinks
that although under ignorance he is not conscious that his hands and
legs are diffused all over, but when he attains to proper knowledge he
will come to that stage, his thinking is contradictory. This means that
the individual soul, having become conditioned by material nature, is
not supreme. The Supreme is different from the individual soul. The
Supreme Lord can extend His hand without limit; the individual soul
cannot. In Bhagavad-gita the Lord says that if anyone offers Him a
flower, or a fruit, or a little water, He accepts. If the Lord is a far
distance away, how can He accept things? This is the omnipotence of the
Lord: even though He is situated in His own abode, far, far away from
earth, He can extend His hand to accept what anyone offers. That is His
potency. In the Brahma-samhita (5.37) it is stated, goloka eva
nivasaty: although He is always engaged in pastimes in His
transcendental planet, He is all-pervading. The individual soul cannot
claim that he is all-pervading. Therefore this verse describes the
Supreme Soul, the Personality of Godhead, not the individual soul.



TEXT 15

sarvendriya-gunabhasam
sarvendriya-vivarjitam
asaktam sarva-bhrc caiva
nirgunam guna-bhoktr ca

SYNONYMS

sarva--all; indriya--senses; guna--qualities; abhasam--original source;
sarva--all; indriya--senses; vivarjitam--being without; asaktam--
without attachment; sarva-bhrt--maintainer of everyone; ca--also; eva--
certainly; nirgunam--without material qualities; guna-bhoktr--
simultaneously master of the gunas; ca--also.

TRANSLATION

The Supersoul is the original source of all senses, yet He is without
senses. He is unattached, although He is the maintainer of all living
beings. He transcends the modes of nature, and at the same time He is
the master of all modes of material nature.

PURPORT

The Supreme Lord, although the source of all the senses of the living
entities, doesn't have material senses like they have. Actually, the
individual souls have spiritual senses, but in conditioned life they
are covered with the material elements, and therefore the sense
activities are exhibited through matter. The Supreme Lord's senses are
not so covered. His senses are transcendental and are therefore called
nirguna. Guna means the material modes, but His senses are without
material covering. It should be understood that His senses are not
exactly like ours. Although He is the source of all our sensual
activities, He has His transcendental senses which are uncontaminated.
This is very nicely explained in the Svetasvatara Upanisad (3.19) in
the verse apani-pado javano grahita. The Supreme Personality of Godhead
has no hands which are materially contaminated, but He has His hands
and accepts whatever sacrifice is offered to Him. That is the
distinction between the conditioned soul and the Supersoul. He has no
material eyes, but He has eyes--otherwise how could He see? He sees
everything, past, present and future. He lives within the heart of the
living being, and He knows what we have done in the past, what we are
doing now, and what is awaiting us in the future. This is also
confirmed in Bhagavad-gita: He knows everything, but no one knows Him.
It is said that the Supreme Lord has no legs like us, but He can travel
throughout space because He has spiritual legs. In other words, the
Lord is not impersonal; He has His eyes, legs, hands and everything
else, and because we are part and parcel of the Supreme Lord we also
have these things. But His hands, legs, eyes and senses are not
contaminated by material nature.
Bhagavad-gita also confirms that when the Lord appears He appears as He
is by His internal potency. He is not contaminated by the material
energy because He is the Lord of material energy. In the Vedic
literature we find that His whole embodiment is spiritual. He has His
eternal form called sac-cid-ananda-vigraha. He is full of all opulence.
He is the proprietor of all wealth and the owner of all energy. He is
the most intelligent and is full of knowledge. These are some of the
symptoms of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is maintainer of all



living entities and the witness of all activity. As far as we can
understand from Vedic literature, the Supreme Lord is always
transcendental. Although we do not see His head, face, hands, or legs,
He has them, and when we are elevated to the transcendental situation
then we can see the Lord's form. Due to materially contaminated senses,
we cannot see His form. Therefore the impersonalists who are still
materially affected cannot understand the Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 16

bahir antas ca bhutanam
acaram caram eva ca
suksmatvat tad avijneyam
dura-stham cantike ca tat

SYNONYMS

bahih--outside; antah--inside; ca--also; bhutanam--of all living
entities; acaram--not moving; caram--moving; eva--also; ca--and;
suksmatvat--on account of being subtle; tat--that; avijneyam--
unknowable; dura-stham--far away; ca--also; antike--near; ca--and; tat-
-that.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Truth exists both internally and externally, in the moving
and nonmoving. He is beyond the power of the material senses to see or
to know. Although far, far away, He is also near to all.

PURPORT

In Vedic literature we understand that Narayana, the Supreme Person, is
residing both outside and inside of every living entity. He is present
in both the spiritual and material worlds. Although He is far, far
away, still He is near to us. These are the statements of Vedic
literature. Asino duram vrajati sayano yati sarvatah (Katha Upanisad
1.2.21). And because He is always engaged in transcendental bliss, we
cannot understand how He is enjoying His full opulence. We cannot see
or understand with these material senses. Therefore in the Vedic
language it is said that to understand Him our material mind and senses
cannot act. But one who has purified his mind and senses by practicing
Krsna consciousness in devotional service can see Him constantly. It is
confirmed in Brahma-samhita that the devotee who has developed love for
the Supreme God can see Him always, without cessation. And it is
confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (11.54) that He can be seen and understood
only by devotional service. Bhaktya tv ananyaya sakyah.

TEXT 17

avibhaktam ca bhutesu
vibhaktam iva ca sthitam
bhuta-bhartr ca taj jneyam
grasisnu prabhavisnu ca

SYNONYMS

avibhaktam--without division; ca--also; bhutesu--in every living being;
vibhaktam--divided; iva--as if; ca--also; sthitam--situated; bhuta-



bhartr--maintainer of all living entities; ca--also; tat--that; jneyam-
-to be understood; grasisnu--devours; prabhavisnu--develops; ca--also.

TRANSLATION

Although the Supersoul appears to be divided, He is never divided. He
is situated as one. Although He is the maintainer of every living
entity, it is to be understood that He devours and develops all.

PURPORT

The Lord is situated in everyone's heart as the Supersoul. Does this
mean that He has become divided? No. Actually, He is one. The example
is given of the sun: The sun, at the meridian, is situated in its
place. But if one goes for five thousand miles in all directions and
asks, "Where is the sun?" everyone will say that it is shining on his
head. In the Vedic literature this example is given to show that
although He is undivided, He is situated as if divided. Also it is said
in Vedic literature that one Visnu is present everywhere by His
omnipotence, just as the sun appears in many places to many persons.
And the Supreme Lord, although the maintainer of every living entity,
devours everything at the time of annihilation. This was confirmed in
the Eleventh Chapter when the Lord said that He had come to devour all
the warriors assembled at Kuruksetra. He also mentioned that in the
form of time He devours also. He is the annihilator, the killer of all.
When there is creation, He develops all from their original state, and
at the time of annihilation He devours them. The Vedic hymns confirm
the fact that He is the origin of all living entities and the rest of
all. After creation, everything rests in His omnipotence, and after
annihilation everything again returns to rest in Him. These are the
confirmations of Vedic hymns. Yato va imani bhutani jayante yena jatani
jivanti yat prayanty abhisam-visanti tad brahma tad vijijnasasva
(Taittiriya Upanisad 3.1).

TEXT 18

jyotisam api taj jyotis
tamasah param ucyate
jnanam jneyam jnana-gamyam
hrdi sarvasya visthitam

SYNONYMS

jyotisam--in all luminous objects; api--also; tat--that; jyotih--source
of light; tamasah--of the darkness; param--beyond; ucyate--is said;
jnanam--knowledge; jneyam--to be known; jnana-gamyam--to be approached
by knowledge; hrdi--in the heart; sarvasya--of everyone; visthitam--
situated.

TRANSLATION

He is the source of light in all luminous objects. He is beyond the
darkness of matter and is unmanifested. He is knowledge, He is the
object of knowledge, and He is the goal of knowledge. He is situated in
everyone's heart.

PURPORT



The Supersoul, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the source of
light in all luminous objects like the sun, moon and stars. In the
Vedic literature we find that in the spiritual kingdom there is no need
of sun or moon because the effulgence of the Supreme Lord is there. In
the material world that brahmajyoti, the Lord's spiritual effulgence,
is covered by mahat-tattva, the material elements; therefore in this
material world we require the assistance of sun, moon, electricity,
etc., for light. But in the spiritual world there is no need of such
things. It is clearly stated in the Vedic literature that because of
His luminous effulgence, everything is illuminated. It is clear,
therefore, that His situation is not in the material world. He is
situated in the spiritual world, which is far, far away in the
spiritual sky. That is also confirmed in the Vedic literature. Aditya-
varnam tamasah parastat (Svetasvatara Upanisad 3.8). He is just like
the sun, eternally luminous, but He is far, far beyond the darkness of
this material world. His knowledge is transcendental. The Vedic
literature confirms that Brahman is concentrated transcendental
knowledge. To one who is anxious to be transferred to that spiritual
world, knowledge is given by the Supreme Lord who is situated in
everyone's heart.
One Vedic mantra (Svetasvatara Upanisad 6.18) says, tam ha devam atma-
buddhi-prakasam mumuksur vai saranam aham prapadye. One must surrender
unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead if he at all wants liberation.
As far as the goal of ultimate knowledge is concerned, it is also
confirmed in Vedic literature: tam eva viditvati mrtyum eti. "Only by
knowing Him can one surpass the boundary of birth and death."
(Svetasvatara Upanisad 3.8) He is situated in everyone's heart as the
supreme controller. The Supreme has legs and hands distributed
everywhere, and this cannot be said of the individual soul. Therefore
that there are two knowers of the field of activity, the individual
soul and the Supersoul, must be admitted. One's hands and legs are
distributed locally, but Krsna's hands and legs are distributed
everywhere. This is confirmed in the Svetasvatara Upanisad (3.17):
sarvasya prabhum isanam sarvasya saranam brhat. That Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Supersoul, is the prabhu or master, of all
living entities; therefore He is the ultimate shelter of all living
entities. So there is no denying the fact that the Supreme Supersoul
and the individual soul are always different.

TEXT 19

iti ksetram tatha jnanam
jneyam coktam samasatah
mad-bhakta etad vijnaya
mad-bhavayopapadyate

SYNONYMS

iti--thus; ksetram--the field of activities (the body); tatha--also;
jnanam--knowledge; jneyam--the knowable; ca--also; uktam--described;
samasatah--in summary; mat-bhaktah--My devotee; etat--all this;
vijnaya--after understanding; mat-bhavaya--My nature; upapadyate--
attains.

TRANSLATION



Thus the field of activities [the body], knowledge and the knowable
have been summarily described by Me. Only My devotees can understand
this thoroughly and thus attain to My nature.

PURPORT

The Lord has described in summary the body, knowledge and the knowable.
This knowledge is of three things: the knower, the knowable and the
process of knowing. Combined, these are called vijnana, or the science
of knowledge. Perfect knowledge can be understood by the unalloyed
devotees of the Lord directly. Others are unable to understand. The
monists say that at the ultimate stage these three items become one,
but the devotees do not accept this. Knowledge and development of
knowledge mean understanding oneself in Krsna consciousness. We are
being led by material consciousness, but as soon as we transfer all
consciousness to Krsna's activities and realize that Krsna is
everything, then we attain real knowledge. In other words, knowledge is
nothing but the preliminary stage of understanding devotional service
perfectly.

TEXT 20

prakrtim purusam caiva
viddhy anadi ubhav api
vikarams ca gunams caiva
viddhi prakrti-sambhavan

SYNONYMS

prakrtim--material nature; purusam--living entities; ca--also; eva--
certainly; viddhi--must know; anadi--without beginning; ubhau--both;
api--also; vikaran--transformations; ca--also; gunan--three modes of
nature; ca--also; eva--certainly; viddhi--know; prakrti--material
nature; sambhavan--produced of.

TRANSLATION

Material nature and the living entities should be understood to be
beginningless. Their transformations and the modes of matter are
products of material nature.

PURPORT

By this knowledge, the body, the field of activities and the knowers of
the body (both the individual soul and the Supersoul) can be known. The
body is the field of activity and is composed of material nature. It is
the individual soul which is embodied. Enjoying the activities of the
body is the purusa, or the living entity. He is one knower, and the
other is the Supersoul. Of course, it is to be understood that both the
Supersoul and the individual entity are different manifestations of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The living entity is in the category of
His energy, and the Supersoul is in the category of His personal
expansion.
Both material nature and the living entity are eternal. That is to say
that they existed before the creation. The material manifestation is
from the energy of the Supreme Lord and so also are the living
entities, but they are of the superior energy. Both the living entities
and material nature existed before this cosmos was manifested. Material



nature was absorbed in the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Maha-Visnu,
and when it was required, it was manifested by the agency of mahat-
tattva. Similarly, the living entities are also in Him, and because
they are conditioned, they are averse to serving the Supreme Lord. Thus
they are not allowed to enter into the spiritual sky. After the winding
up of material nature, these living entities are again given a chance
to act in the material world and prepare themselves to enter into the
spiritual world. That is the mystery of this material creation.
Actually the living entity is originally the spiritual part and parcel
of the Supreme Lord, but due to his rebellious nature, he is
conditioned within material nature. It really does not matter how these
living entities or superior entities of the Supreme Lord have come in
contact with material nature. The Supreme Personality of Godhead knows,
however, how and why this actually took place. In the scriptures the
Lord says that those attracted by this material nature are undergoing a
hard struggle for existence. But we should know it with certainty from
the descriptions of these few verses that all the transformations and
influences of material nature by the three modes are also productions
of material nature. All transformations and variety in respect to
living entities are due to the body. As far as spirit is concerned,
living entities are all the same.

TEXT 21

karya-karana-kartrtve
hetuh prakrtir ucyate
purusah sukha-duhkhanam
bhoktrtve hetur ucyate

SYNONYMS

karya--effect; karana--cause; kartrtve--in the matter of creation;
hetuh--instrument; prakrtih--material nature; ucyate--is said to be;
purusah--the living entity; sukha--of happiness; duhkhanam--and
distress; bhoktrtve--in enjoyment; hetuh--the instrument; ucyate--is
said to be.

TRANSLATION

Nature is said to be the cause of all material activities and effects,
whereas the living entity is the cause of the various sufferings and
enjoyments in this world.

PURPORT

The different manifestations of body and senses among the living
entities are due to material nature. There are 8,400,000 different
species of life, and these varieties are the creation of the material
nature. They arise from the different sensual pleasures of the living
entity, who thus desires to live in this body or that. When he is put
into different bodies, he enjoys different kinds of happiness and
distress. His material happiness and distress are due to his body, and
not to himself as he is. In his original state there is no doubt of
enjoyment; therefore that is his real state. Because of the desire to
lord it over material nature, he is in the material world. In the
spiritual world there is no such thing. The spiritual world is pure,
but in the material world everyone is struggling hard to acquire
victims who present different pleasures to the body. It might be more



clear to state that this body is the effect of the senses. The senses
are instruments for gratifying desire. Now, the sum total--body and
instrument senses--are offered by material nature and, as will be clear
in the next verse, the living entity is blessed or damned with
circumstances according to his past desire and activity. According to
one's desires and activities, material nature places one in various
residential quarters. The being himself is the cause of his attaining
such residential quarters and his attendant enjoyment or suffering.
Once placed in some particular kind of body, he comes under the control
of nature because the body, being matter, acts according to the laws of
nature. At that time, the living entity has no power to change that
law. Suppose an entity is put into the body of a dog. As soon as he is
put into the body of a dog, he must act like a dog. He cannot act
otherwise. And if the living entity is put into the body of a hog, then
he is forced to eat stool and act like a hog. Similarly, if the living
entity is put into the body of a demigod, he must act according to his
body. This is the law of nature. But in all circumstances, the
Supersoul is with the individual soul. That is explained in the Vedas
(Mundaka Upanisad 3.1.1) as follows: dva suparna sayuja sakhayah. The
Supreme Lord is so kind upon the living entity that He always
accompanies the individual soul and in all circumstances is present as
the Supersoul, or Paramatma.

TEXT 22

purusah prakrti-stho hi
bhunkte prakrti-jan gunan
karanam guna-sango 'sya
sad-asad-yoni-janmasu

SYNONYMS

purusah--the living entity; prakrti-sthah--being situated in the
material energy; hi--certainly; bhunkte--enjoys; prakrti-jan--produced
by the material nature; gunan--modes of nature; karanam--cause; guna-
sangah--association with the modes of nature; asya--of the living
entity; sat-asat--good and bad; yoni--species of life; janmasu--birth.

TRANSLATION

The living entity in material nature thus follows the ways of life,
enjoying the three modes of nature. This is due to his association with
that material nature. Thus he meets with good and evil amongst various
species.

PURPORT

This verse is very important for an understanding of how the living
entities transmigrate from one body to another. It is explained in the
Second Chapter that the living entity is transmigrating from one body
to another just as one changes dress. This change of dress is due to
his attachment to material existence. As long as he is captivated by
this false manifestation, he has to continue transmigrating from one
body to another. Due to his desire to lord it over material nature, he
is put into such undesirable circumstances. Under the influence of
material desire, the entity is born sometimes as a demigod, sometimes
as a man, sometimes as a beast, as a bird, as a worm, as an aquatic, as
a saintly man, as a bug. This is going on. And in all cases the living



entity thinks himself to be the master of his circumstances, yet he is
under the influence of material nature.
How he is put into such different bodies is explained here. It is due
to association with the different modes of nature. One has to rise,
therefore, above the three material modes and become situated in the
transcendental position. That is called Krsna consciousness. Unless one
is situated in Krsna consciousness, his material consciousness will
oblige him to transfer from one body to another because he has material
desires since time immemorial. But he has to change that conception.
That change can be effected only by hearing from authoritative sources.
The best example is here: Arjuna is hearing the science of God from
Krsna. The living entity, if he submits to this hearing process, will
lose his long-cherished desire to dominate material nature, and
gradually and proportionately, as he reduces his long desire to
dominate, he comes to enjoy spiritual happiness. In a Vedic mantra it
is said that as he becomes learned in association with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, he proportionately relishes his eternal
blissful life.

TEXT 23

upadrastanumanta ca
bharta bhokta mahesvarah
paramatmeti capy ukto
dehe 'smin purusah parah

SYNONYMS

upadrasta--overseer; anumanta--permitter; ca--also; bharta--master;
bhokta--supreme enjoyer; maha-isvarah--the Supreme Lord; parama-atma--
Supersoul; iti--also; ca--and; api uktah--is said; dehe--in this body;
asmin--this; purusah--enjoyer; parah--transcendental.

TRANSLATION

Yet in this body there is another, a transcendental enjoyer who is the
Lord, the supreme proprietor, who exists as the overseer and permitter,
and who is known as the Supersoul.

PURPORT

It is stated here that the Supersoul, who is always with the individual
soul, is the representation of the Supreme Lord. He is not an ordinary
living entity. Because the monist philosophers take the knower of the
body to be one, they think that there is no difference between the
Supersoul and the individual soul. To clarify this, the Lord says that
He is the representation of Paramatma in every body. He is different
from the individual soul; He is para, transcendental. The individual
soul enjoys the activities of a particular field, but the Supersoul is
present not as finite enjoyer nor as one taking part in bodily
activities, but as the witness, overseer, permitter and supreme
enjoyer. His name is Paramatma, not atma, and He is transcendental. It
is distinctly clear that the atma and Paramatma are different. The
Supersoul, the Paramatma, has legs and hands everywhere, but the
individual soul does not. And because He is the Supreme Lord, He is
present within to sanction the individual soul's desiring material
enjoyment. Without the sanction of the Supreme Soul, the individual
soul cannot do anything. The individual is bhukta, or the sustained,



and the Lord is bhokta, or the maintainer. There are innumerable living
entities, and He is staying in them as a friend.
The fact is that individual living entities are eternally part and
parcel of the Supreme Lord, and both of them are very intimately
related as friends. But the living entity has the tendency to reject
the sanction of the Supreme Lord and act independently in an attempt to
dominate nature, and because he has this tendency, he is called the
marginal energy of the Supreme Lord. The living entity can be situated
either in the material energy or the spiritual energy. As long as he is
conditioned by the material energy, the Supreme Lord, as his friend,
the Supersoul, stays with him just to get him to return to the
spiritual energy. The Lord is always eager to take him back to the
spiritual energy, but due to his minute independence, the individual
entity is continually rejecting the association of spiritual light.
This misuse of independence is the cause of his material strife in the
conditioned nature. The Lord, therefore, is always giving instruction
from within and from without. From without He gives instructions as
stated in Bhagavad-gita, and from within He tries to convince him that
his activities in the material field are not conducive to real
happiness. "Just give it up and turn your face toward Me. Then you will
be happy," He says. Thus the intelligent person who places his faith in
the Paramatma or the Supreme Personality of Godhead begins to advance
toward a blissful eternal life of knowledge.

TEXT 24

ya evam vetti purusam
prakrtim ca gunaih saha
sarvatha vartamano 'pi
na sa bhuyo 'bhijayate

SYNONYMS

yah--anyone; evam--thus; vetti--understands; purusam--the living
entity; prakrtim--material nature; ca--and; gunaih--modes of material
nature; saha--with; sarvatha--by all means; vartamanah--situated; api--
in spite of; na--never; sah--he; bhuyah--again; abhijayate--takes his
birth.

TRANSLATION

One who understands this philosophy concerning material nature, the
living entity and the interaction of the modes of nature is sure to
attain liberation. He will not take birth here again, regardless of his
present position.

PURPORT

Clear understanding of material nature, the Supersoul, the individual
soul and their interrelation makes one eligible to become liberated and
turn to the spiritual atmosphere without being forced to return to this
material nature. This is the result of knowledge. The purpose of
knowledge is to understand distinctly that the living entity has by
chance fallen into this material existence. By his personal endeavor in
association with authorities, saintly persons and a spiritual master,
he has to understand his position and then revert to spiritual
consciousness or Krsna consciousness by understanding Bhagavad-gita as
it is explained by the Personality of Godhead. Then it is certain that



he will never come again into this material existence; he will be
transferred into the spiritual world for a blissful eternal life of
knowledge.

TEXT 25

dhyanenatmani pasyanti
kecid atmanam atmana
anye sankhyena yogena
karma-yogena capare

SYNONYMS

dhyanena--by meditation; atmani--self; pasyanti--see; kecit--one;
atmanam--Supersoul; atmana--by the mind; anye--others; sankhyena--by
philosophical discussion; yogena--by the yoga system; karma-yogena--by
activities without fruitive desire; ca--also; apare--others.

TRANSLATION

That Supersoul is perceived by some through meditation, by some through
the cultivation of knowledge, and by others through working without
fruitive desire.

PURPORT

The Lord informs Arjuna that the conditioned souls can be divided into
two classes as far as man's search for self-realization is concerned.
Those who are atheists, agnostics and skeptics are beyond the sense of
spiritual understanding. But there are others who are faithful in their
understanding of spiritual life, and they are called workers who have
renounced fruitive results. Those who always try to establish the
doctrine of monism are also counted amongst the atheists and agnostics.
In other words, only the devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
are really capable of spiritual understanding because they understand
that beyond this material nature there is the spiritual world and the
Supreme Personality of Godhead who is expanded as the Paramatma, the
Supersoul in everyone, the all-pervading Godhead. Of course there are
those who try to understand the Supreme Absolute Truth by cultivation
of knowledge, and they can be counted in the second class. The
atheistic philosophers analyze this material world into twenty-four
elements, and they place the individual soul as the twenty-fifth item.
When they are able to understand the nature of the individual soul to
be transcendental to the material elements, they are able to understand
also that above the individual soul there is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. He is the twenty-sixth element. Thus gradually they also come
to the standard of devotional service in Krsna consciousness. Those who
work without fruitive results are also perfect in their attitude. They
are given a chance to advance to the platform of devotional service in
Krsna consciousness. Here it is stated that there are some people who
are pure in consciousness and who try to find out the Supersoul by
meditation, and when they discover the Supersoul within themselves,
they become transcendentally situated. Similarly, there are others who
also try to understand the Supreme Soul by cultivation of knowledge,
and there are others who cultivate the hatha-yoga system and who try to
satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead by childish activities.

TEXT 26



anye tv evam ajanantah
srutvanyebhya upasate
te 'pi catitaranty eva
mrtyum sruti-parayanah

SYNONYMS

anye--others; tu--but; evam--thus; ajanantah--without spiritual
knowledge; srutva--by hearing; anyebhyah--from others; upasate--begin
to worship; te--they; api--also; ca--and; atitaranti--transcend; eva--
certainly; mrtyum--the path of death; sruti-parayanah--inclined to the
process of hearing.

TRANSLATION

Again there are those who, although not conversant in spiritual
knowledge, begin to worship the Supreme Person upon hearing about Him
from others. Because of their tendency to hear from authorities, they
also transcend the path of birth and death.

PURPORT

This verse is particularly applicable to modern society because in
modern society there is practically no education in spiritual matters.
Some of the people may appear to be atheistic or agnostic or
philosophical, but actually there is no knowledge of philosophy. As for
the common man, if he is a good soul, then there is a chance for
advancement by hearing. This hearing process is very important. Lord
Caitanya, who preached Krsna consciousness in the modern world, gave
great stress to hearing because if the common man simply hears from
authoritative sources, he can progress, especially, according to Lord
Caitanya, if he hears the transcendental vibration Hare Krsna, Hare
Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare
Hare. It is stated, therefore, that all men should take advantage of
hearing from realized souls and gradually become able to understand
everything. The worship of the Supreme Lord will then undoubtedly take
place. Lord Caitanya has said that in this age no one needs to change
his position, but one should give up the endeavor to understand the
Absolute Truth by speculative reasoning. One should learn to become the
servant of those who are in knowledge of the Supreme Lord. If one is
fortunate enough to take shelter of a pure devotee, hear from him about
self-realization and follow in his footsteps, he will be gradually
elevated to the position of a pure devotee. In this verse particularly,
the process of hearing is strongly recommended, and this is very
appropriate. Although the common man is often not as capable as so-
called philosophers, faithful hearing from an authoritative person will
help one transcend this material existence and go back to Godhead, back
to home.

TEXT 27

yavat sanjayate kincit
sattvam sthavara-jangamam
ksetra-ksetrajna-samyogat
tad viddhi bharatarsabha

SYNONYMS



yavat--whatever; sanjayate--takes place; kincit--anything; sattvam--
existence; sthavara--not moving; jangamam--moving; ksetra--the body;
ksetra-jna--knower of the body; samyogat--union between; tat viddhi--
you must know it; bharata-rsabha--O chief of the Bharatas.

TRANSLATION

O chief of the Bharatas, whatever you see in existence, both moving and
unmoving, is only the combination of the field of activities and the
knower of the field.

PURPORT

Both material nature and the living entity, which were existing before
the creation of the cosmos, are explained in this verse. Whatever is
created is but a combination of the living entity and material nature.
There are many manifestations like trees, mountains and hills, which
are not moving, and there are many existences which are moving, and all
of them are but combinations of material nature and superior nature,
the living entity. Without the touch of superior nature, the living
entity, nothing can grow. Therefore the relationship between matter and
nature is eternally going on, and this combination is effected by the
Supreme Lord; therefore He is the controller of both the superior and
inferior natures. The material nature is created by Him, and the
superior nature is placed in this material nature, and thus all these
activities and manifestations take place.

TEXT 28

samam sarvesu bhutesu
tisthantam paramesvaram
vinasyatsv avinasyantam
yah pasyati sa pasyati

SYNONYMS

samam--equally; sarvesu--in all; bhutesu--living entities; tisthan-tam-
-residing; parama-isvaram--the Supersoul; vinasyatsu--in the
destructible; avinasyantam--not destroyed; yah--anyone; pasyati--sees;
sah--he; pasyati--actually sees.

TRANSLATION

One who sees the Supersoul accompanying the individual soul in all
bodies, and who understands that neither the soul nor the Supersoul is
ever destroyed, actually sees.

PURPORT

Anyone who can see three things--the body, the proprietor of the body,
or individual soul, and the friend of the individual soul, combined
together by good association--is actually in knowledge. Those who are
not associated with the soul's friend are ignorant; they simply see the
body, and when the body is destroyed they think that everything is
finished, but actually it is not so. After the destruction of the body,
both the soul and the Supersoul exist, and they go on eternally in many
various moving and unmoving forms. The Sanskrit word paramesvara is



sometimes translated as "the individual soul" because the soul is the
master of the body, and after the destruction of the body he transfers
to another form. In that way he is master. But there are others who
interpret this paramesvara to be the Supersoul. In either case, both
the Supersoul and the individual soul continue. They are not destroyed.
One who can see in this way can actually see what is happening.

TEXT 29

samam pasyan hi sarvatra
samavasthitam isvaram
na hinasty atmanatmanam
tato yati param gatim

SYNONYMS

samam--equally; pasyan--seeing; hi--certainly; sarvatra--everywhere;
samavasthitam--equally situated; isvaram--Supersoul; na--does not;
hinasti--degrade; atmana--by the mind; atmanam--the soul; tatah yati--
then reaches; param--the transcendental; gatim--destination.

TRANSLATION

One who sees the Supersoul in every living being and equal everywhere
does not degrade himself by his mind. Thus he approaches the
transcendental destination.

PURPORT

The living entity, by accepting his material existence as just so much
suffering, can become situated in his spiritual existence. If one
understands that the Supreme is situated in His Paramatma manifestation
everywhere, that is, if one can see the presence of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead in every living thing, he does not degrade
himself, and he therefore gradually advances to the spiritual world.
The mind is generally addicted to self-centered processes; but when the
mind turns to the Supersoul, one becomes advanced in spiritual
understanding.

TEXT 30

prakrtyaiva ca karmani
kriyamanani sarvasah
yah pasyati tathatmanam
akartaram sa pasyati

SYNONYMS

prakrtya--by material nature; eva--certainly; ca--also; karmani--
activities; kriyamanani--engaged in performing; sarvasah--in all
respects; yah--anyone who; pasyati--sees; tatha--also; atmanam--
himself; akartaram--non-doer; sah--he; pasyati--sees perfectly.

TRANSLATION

One who can see that all activities are performed by the body, which is
created of material nature, and sees that the self does nothing,
actually sees.



PURPORT

This body is made by material nature under the direction of the
Supersoul, and whatever activities are going on in respect to one's
body are not his doing. Whatever one is supposed to do, either for
happiness or for distress, one is forced to do because of the bodily
constitution. The self, however, is outside all these bodily
activities. This body is given according to one's past desires. To
fulfill desires, one is given the body, with which he acts accordingly.
Practically speaking, the body is a machine, designed by the Supreme
Lord, to fulfill desires. Because of desires, one is put into difficult
circumstances to suffer or to enjoy. This transcendental vision of the
living entity, when developed, makes one separate from bodily
activities. One who has such a vision is an actual seer.

TEXT 31

yada bhuta-prthag-bhavam
eka-stham anupasyati
tata eva ca vistaram
brahma sampadyate tada

SYNONYMS

yada--when; bhuta--living entities; prthak-bhavam--separated
identities; eka-stham--situated in one; anupasyati--tries to see
through authority; tatah eva--thereafter; ca--also; vistaram--expanded;
brahma--the Absolute; sampadyate--attains; tada--at that time.

TRANSLATION

When a sensible man ceases to see different identities, which are due
to different material bodies, he attains to the Brahman conception.
Thus he sees that beings are expanded everywhere.

PURPORT

When one can see that the various bodies of living entities arise due
to the different desires of the individual soul and do not actually
belong to the soul itself, one actually sees. In the material
conception of life, we find someone a demigod, someone a human being, a
dog, a cat, etc. This is material vision, not actual vision. This
material differentiation is due to a material conception of life. After
the destruction of the material body, the spirit soul is one. The
spirit soul, due to contact with material nature, gets different types
of bodies. When one can see this, he attains spiritual vision; thus
being freed from differentiations like man, animal, big, low, etc., one
becomes purified in his consciousness and able to develop Krsna
consciousness in his spiritual identity. How he then sees things will
be explained in the next verse.

TEXT 32

anaditvan nirgunatvat
paramatmayam avyayah
sarira-stho 'pi kaunteya
na karoti na lipyate



SYNONYMS

anaditvat--due to eternity; nirgunatvat--due to transcendental; parama-
-beyond material nature; atma--spirit; ayam--this; avyayah--
inexhaustible; sarira-sthah api--though dwelling in the body; kaunteya-
-O son of Kunti; na karoti--never does anything; na lipyate--nor is he
entangled.

TRANSLATION

Those with the vision of eternity can see that the soul is
transcendental, eternal, and beyond the modes of nature. Despite
contact with the material body, O Arjuna, the soul neither does
anything nor is entangled.

PURPORT

A living entity appears to be born because of the birth of the material
body, but actually the living entity is eternal; he is not born, and in
spite of his being situated in a material body, he is transcendental
and eternal. Thus he cannot be destroyed. By nature he is full of
bliss. He does not engage himself in any material activities; therefore
the activities performed due to his contact with material bodies do not
entangle him.

TEXT 33

yatha sarva-gatam sauksmyad
akasam nopalipyate
sarvatravasthito dehe
tathatma nopalipyate

SYNONYMS

yatha--as; sarva-gatam--all-pervading; sauksmyat--due to being subtle;
akasam--the sky; na--never; upalipyate--mixes; sarvatra--everywhere;
avasthitah--situated; dehe--in the body; tatha--such; atma--the self;
na--never; upalipyate--mixes.

TRANSLATION

The sky, due to its subtle nature, does not mix with anything, although
it is all-pervading. Similarly, the soul, situated in Brahman vision,
does not mix with the body, though situated in that body.

PURPORT

The air enters into water, mud, stool and whatever else is there; still
it does not mix with anything. Similarly, the living entity, even
though situated in varieties of bodies, is aloof from them due to his
subtle nature. Therefore it is impossible to see with the material eyes
how the living entity is in contact with this body and how he is out of
it after the destruction of the body. No one in science can ascertain
this.

TEXT 34



yatha prakasayaty ekah
krtsnam lokam imam ravih
ksetram ksetri tatha krtsnam
prakasayati bharata

SYNONYMS

yatha--as; prakasayati--illuminates; ekah--one; krtsnam--the whole;
lokam--universe; imam--this; ravih--the sun; ksetram--this body;
ksetri--the soul; tatha--similarly; krtsnam--all; prakasayati--
illuminates; bharata--O son of Bharata.

TRANSLATION

O son of Bharata, as the sun alone illuminates all this universe, so
does the living entity, one within the body, illuminate the entire body
by consciousness.

PURPORT

There are various theories regarding consciousness. Here in Bhagavad-
gita the example of the sun and the sunshine is given. As the sun is
situated in one place, but is illuminating the whole universe, so a
small particle of spirit soul, although situated in the heart of this
body, is illuminating the whole body by consciousness. Thus
consciousness is the proof of the presence of the soul, as sunshine or
light is the proof of the presence of the sun. When the soul is present
in the body, there is consciousness all over the body, and as soon as
the soul has passed from the body, there is no more consciousness. This
can be easily understood by any intelligent man. Therefore
consciousness is not a production of the combinations of matter. It is
the symptom of the living entity. The consciousness of the living
entity, although qualitatively one with the supreme consciousness, is
not supreme because the consciousness of one particular body does not
share that of another body. But the Supersoul, which is situated in all
bodies as the friend of the individual soul, is conscious of all
bodies. That is the difference between supreme consciousness and
individual consciousness.

TEXT 35

ksetra-ksetrajnayor evam
antaram jnana-caksusa
bhuta-prakrti-moksam ca
ye vidur yanti te param

SYNONYMS

ksetra--body; ksetra-jnayoh--of the proprietor of the body; evam--that;
antaram--difference; jnana-caksusa--by vision of knowledge; bhuta--
living entity; prakrti--material nature; moksam--liberation; ca--also;
ye--one who; viduh--knows; yanti--approaches; te--they; param--Supreme.

TRANSLATION

One who knowingly sees this difference between the body and the owner
of the body and can understand the process of liberation from this
bondage, also attains to the supreme goal.



PURPORT

The purport of this Thirteenth Chapter is that one should know the
distinction between the body, the owner of the body, and the Supersoul.
A faithful person should at first have some good association to hear of
God and thus gradually become enlightened. If one accepts a spiritual
master, he can learn to distinguish between matter and spirit, and that
becomes the steppingstone for further spiritual realization. A
spiritual master teaches his students to get free from the material
concept of life by various instructions. For instance, in Bhagavad-gita
we find Krsna instructing Arjuna to free him from materialistic
considerations.
One can understand that this body is matter; it can be analyzed with
its twenty-four elements. That is the gross manifestation. And the
subtle manifestation is the mind and psychological effects. And the
symptoms of life are the interaction of these features. But over and
above this, there is the soul, and there is also the Supersoul. The
soul and the Supersoul are two. This material world is working by the
conjunction of the soul and the twenty-four material elements. One who
can see the constitution of the whole material manifestation as this
combination of the soul and material elements and also can see the
situation of the Supreme Soul becomes eligible for transfer to the
spiritual world. These things are meant for contemplation and for
realization, and one should have a complete understanding of this
chapter with the help of the spiritual master.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Thirteenth Chapter of the
Srimad Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Nature, the Enjoyer and
Consciousness.

Chapter 14
The Three Modes Of Material Nature

TEXT 1

sri-bhagavan uvaca
param bhuyah pravaksyami
jnananam jnanam uttamam
yaj jnatva munayah sarve
param siddhim ito gatah

SYNONYMS

sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; param--
transcendental; bhuyah--again; pravaksyami--I shall speak; jnananam--of
all knowledge; jnanam--knowledge; uttamam--the supreme; yat--which;
jnatva--knowing; munayah--the sages; sarve--all; param--transcendental;
siddhim--perfection; itah--from this world; gatah--attained.

TRANSLATION

The Blessed Lord said: Again I shall declare to you this supreme
wisdom, the best of all knowledge, knowing which all the sages have
attained the supreme perfection.

PURPORT



From the Seventh Chapter to the end of the Twelfth Chapter, Sri Krsna
in detail reveals the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Now, the Lord Himself is further enlightening Arjuna. If one
understands this chapter through the process of philosophical
speculation, he will come to an understanding of devotional service. In
the Thirteenth Chapter, it was clearly explained that by humbly
developing knowledge one may possibly be freed from material
entanglement. It has also been explained that it is due to association
with the modes of nature that the living entity is entangled in this
material world. Now, in this chapter, the Supreme Personality explains
what those modes of nature are, how they act, how they bind and how
they give liberation. The knowledge explained in this chapter is
proclaimed by the Supreme Lord to be superior to the knowledge given so
far in other chapters. By understanding this knowledge, various great
sages attained perfection and transferred to the spiritual world. The
Lord now explains the same knowledge in a better way. This knowledge is
far, far superior to all other processes of knowledge thus far
explained, and knowing this many attained perfection. Thus it is
expected that one who understands this Fourteenth Chapter will attain
perfection.

TEXT 2

idam jnanam upasritya
mama sadharmyam agatah
sarge 'pi nopajayante
pralaye na vyathanti ca

SYNONYMS

idam--this; jnanam--knowledge; upasritya--taking shelter of; mama--My;
sadharmyam--nature; agatah--attained; sarge api--even in the creation;
na--never; upajayante--comes in; pralaye--in the annihilation; na--nor;
vyathanti--disturbed; ca--also.

TRANSLATION

By becoming fixed in this knowledge, one can attain to the
transcendental nature, which is like My own nature. Thus established,
one is not born at the time of creation nor disturbed at the time of
dissolution.

PURPORT

After acquiring perfect transcendental knowledge, one acquires
qualitative equality with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, becoming
free from the repetition of birth and death. One does not, however,
lose his identity as an individual soul. It is understood from Vedic
literature that the liberated souls who have reached the transcendental
planets of the spiritual sky always look to the lotus feet of the
Supreme Lord, being engaged in His transcendental loving service. So,
even after liberation, the devotees do not lose their individual
identities.
Generally, in the material world, whatever knowledge we get is
contaminated by the three modes of material nature. But knowledge which
is not contaminated by the three modes of nature is called
transcendental knowledge. As soon as one is situated in that
transcendental knowledge, he is on the same platform as that of the



Supreme Person. Those who have no knowledge of the spiritual sky hold
that after being freed from the material activities of the material
form, this spiritual identity becomes formless, without any
variegatedness. However, just as there is material variegatedness in
this world, so, in the spiritual world, there is also variegatedness.
Those in ignorance of this think that spiritual existence is opposed to
material variety. But actually, in the spiritual sky, one attains
spiritual form. There are spiritual activities, and the spiritual
situation is called devotional life. That atmosphere is said to be
uncontaminated and there one is equal in quality with the Supreme Lord.
To obtain such knowledge, one must develop all the spiritual qualities.
One who thus develops the spiritual qualities is not affected either by
the creation or the destruction of the material world.

TEXT 3

mama yonir mahad brahma
tasmin garbham dadhamy aham
sambhavah sarva-bhutanam
tato bhavati bharata

SYNONYMS

mama--My; yonih--source of birth; mahat--the total material existence;
brahma--supreme; tasmin--in that; garbham--pregnancy; dadhami--create;
aham--I; sambhavah--possibility; sarva-bhutanam--of all living
entities; tatah--thereafter; bhavati--becomes; bharata--O son of
Bharata.

TRANSLATION

The total material substance, called Brahman, is the source of birth,
and it is that Brahman that I impregnate, making possible the births of
all living beings, O son of Bharata.

PURPORT

This is an explanation of the world: everything that takes place is due
to the combination of ksetra and ksetra-jna, the body and the spirit
soul. This combination of material nature and the living entity is made
possible by the Supreme God Himself. The mahat-tattva is the total
cause of the total cosmic manifestation, and because in the total
substance of the material cause there are three modes of nature, it is
sometimes called Brahman. The Supreme Personality impregnates that
total substance, and thus innumerable universes become possible. This
total material substance, the mahat-tattva, is described as Brahman in
the Vedic literature (Mundaka Upanisad 1.1.19): tasmad etad brahma
nama-rupam annam ca jayate. Into that Brahman the seeds of the living
entities are impregnated by the Supreme Person. The twenty-four
elements, beginning from earth, water, fire and air, are all material
energy, called mahad brahma, or the great Brahman, the material nature.
As is explained in the Seventh Chapter, beyond this there is another,
superior nature--the living entity. In material nature the superior
nature is mixed by the will of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and
thereafter all living entities are born of this material nature.
The scorpion lays its eggs in piles of rice, and sometimes it is said
that the scorpion is born out of rice. But the rice is not the cause of
the scorpion. Actually, the eggs were laid by the mother. Similarly,



material nature is not the cause of the birth of the living entities.
The seed is given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and they only
seem to come out as products of material nature. Thus every living
entity, according to his past activities, has a different body, created
by this material nature, and the entity can enjoy or suffer according
to his past deeds. The Lord is the cause of all the manifestations of
living entities in this material world.

TEXT 4

sarva-yonisu kaunteya
murtayah sambhavanti yah
tasam brahma mahad yonir
aham bija-pradah pita

SYNONYMS

sarva-yonisu--in all species of life; kaunteya--O son of Kunti;
murtayah--forms; sambhavanti--as they appear; yah--which; tasam--all of
them; brahma--supreme; mahat yonih--the source of birth in the material
substance; aham--Myself; bija-pradah--seed-giving; pita--father.

TRANSLATION

It should be understood that all species of life, O son of Kunti, are
made possible by birth in this material nature, and that I am the seed-
giving father.

PURPORT

In this verse it is clearly explained that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Krsna, is the original father of all living entities. The
living entities are combinations of the material nature and the
spiritual nature. Such living entities are seen not only on this
planet, but in every planet, even in the highest, where Brahma is
situated. Everywhere there are living entities; within the earth there
are living entities, even within water and within fire. All these
appearances are due to the mother, material nature, and Krsna's seed-
giving process. The purport is that the living entities, being
impregnated in the material world, come out in various forms at the
time of creation according to their past deeds.

TEXT 5

sattvam rajas tama iti
gunah prakrti-sambhavah
nibadhnanti maha-baho
dehe dehinam avyayam

SYNONYMS

sattvam--mode of goodness; rajah--mode of passion; tamah--mode of
ignorance; iti--thus; gunah--qualities; prakrti--material nature;
sambhavah--produced of; nibadhnanti--does condition; maha-baho--O
mighty-armed one; dehe--in this body; dehinam--the living entity;
avyayam--eternal.

TRANSLATION



Material nature consists of the three modes--goodness, passion and
ignorance. When the living entity comes in contact with nature, he
becomes conditioned by these modes.

PURPORT

The living entity, because he is transcendental, has nothing to do with
this material nature. Still, because he has become conditioned by the
material world, he is acting under the spell of the three modes of
material nature. Because living entities have different kinds of
bodies, in terms of the different aspects of nature, they are induced
to act according to that nature. This is the cause of the varieties of
happiness and distress.

TEXT 6

tatra sattvam nirmalatvat
prakasakam anamayam
sukha-sangena badhnati
jnana-sangena canagha

SYNONYMS

tatra--thereafter; sattvam--mode of goodness; nirmalatvat--being purest
in the material world; prakasakam--illuminating; anamayam--without any
sinful reaction; sukha--happiness; sangena--association; badhnati--
conditions; jnana--knowledge; sangena--association; ca--also; anagha--O
sinless one.

TRANSLATION

O sinless one, the mode of goodness, being purer than the others, is
illuminating, and it frees one from all sinful reactions. Those
situated in that mode develop knowledge, but they  become conditioned
by the concept of happiness.

PURPORT

The living entities conditioned by material nature are of various
types. One is happy, another is very active, and another is helpless.
All these types of psychological manifestations are causes of the
entities' conditioned status in nature. How they are differently
conditioned is explained in this section of Bhagavad-gita. The mode of
goodness is first considered. The effect of developing the mode of
goodness in the material world is that one becomes wiser than those
otherwise conditioned. A man in the mode of goodness is not so much
affected by material miseries, and he has a sense of advancement in
material knowledge. The representative type is the brahmana, who is
supposed to be situated in the mode of goodness. This sense of
happiness is due to understanding that, in the mode of goodness, one is
more or less free from sinful reactions. Actually, in the Vedic
literature it is said that the mode of goodness means greater knowledge
and a greater sense of happiness.
The difficulty here is that when a living entity is situated in the
mode of goodness, he becomes conditioned to feel that he is advanced in
knowledge and is better than others. In this way he becomes
conditioned. The best examples are the scientist and philosopher: each



is very proud of his knowledge, and because they generally improve
their living conditions, they feel a sort of material happiness. This
sense of advanced happiness in conditioned life makes them bound by the
mode of goodness of material nature. As such, they are attracted toward
working in the mode of goodness, and, as long as they have an
attraction for working in that way, they have to take some type of body
in the modes of nature. Thus there is no likelihood of liberation, or
of being transferred to the spiritual world. Repeatedly one may become
a philosopher, a scientist or a poet, and repeatedly become entangled
in the same disadvantages of birth and death. But, due to the illusion
of the material energy, one thinks that that sort of life is pleasant.

TEXT 7

rajo ragatmakam viddhi
trsna-sanga-samudbhavam
tan nibadhnati kaunteya
karma-sangena dehinam

SYNONYMS

rajah--the mode of passion; raga-atmakam--born of desire or lust;
viddhi--know; trsna--with hankering; sanga--association; samudbhavam--
produced of; tat--that; nibadhnati--binds; kaunteya--O son of Kunti;
karma-sangena--by association with fruitive activity; dehinam--the
embodied.

TRANSLATION

The mode of passion is born of unlimited desires and longings, O son of
Kunti, and because of this the embodied living entity is bound to
material fruitive actions.

PURPORT

The mode of passion is characterized by the attraction between man and
woman. Woman has attraction for man, and man has attraction for woman.
This is called the mode of passion. And, when the mode of passion is
increased, one develops the hankering for material enjoyment. He wants
to enjoy sense gratification. For sense gratification, a man in the
mode of passion wants some honor in society, or in the nation, and he
wants to have a happy family, with nice children, wife, and house.
These are the products of the mode of passion. As long as one is
hankering after these things, he has to work very hard. Therefore it is
clearly stated here that he becomes associated with the fruits of his
activities and thus becomes bound by such activities. In order to
please his wife, children and society and to keep up his prestige, one
has to work. Therefore, the whole material world is more or less in the
mode of passion. Modern civilization is considered to be advanced in
the standards of the mode of passion. Formerly, the advanced condition
was considered to be in the mode of goodness. If there is no liberation
for those in the mode of goodness, what to speak of those who are
entangled in the mode of passion?

TEXT 8

tamas tv ajnana-jam viddhi
mohanam sarva-dehinam



pramadalasya-nidrabhis
tan nibadhnati bharata

SYNONYMS

tamah--mode of ignorance; tu--but; ajnana-jam--products of ignorance;
viddhi--knowing; mohanam--delusion; sarva-dehinam--of all embodied
beings; pramada--madness; alasya--indolence; nidrabhih--sleep; tat--
that; nibadhnati--binds; bharata--O son of Bharata.

TRANSLATION

O son of Bharata, the mode of darkness causes the delusion of all
living entities. The result of this mode is madness, indolence and
sleep, which bind the conditioned soul.

PURPORT

In this verse the specific application of the word tu is very
significant. This means that the mode of ignorance is a very peculiar
qualification of the embodied soul. This mode of ignorance is just the
opposite of the mode of goodness. In the mode of goodness, by
development of knowledge, one can understand what is what, but the mode
of ignorance is just the opposite. Everyone under the spell of the mode
of ignorance becomes mad, and a madman cannot understand what is what.
Instead of making advancement, one becomes degraded. The definition of
the mode of ignorance is stated in the Vedic literature. Vastu-
yathatmya-jnanavarakam viparyaya-jnana-janakam tamah: under the spell
of ignorance, one cannot understand a thing as it is. For example,
everyone can see that his grandfather has died, and therefore he will
also die; man is mortal. The children that he conceives will also die.
So death is sure. Still, people are madly accumulating money and
working very hard all day and night, not caring for the eternal spirit.
This is madness. In their madness, they are very reluctant to make
advancement in spiritual understanding. Such people are very lazy. When
they are invited to associate for spiritual understanding, they are not
much interested. They are not even active like the man who is
controlled by the mode of passion. Thus another symptom of one embedded
in the mode of ignorance is that he sleeps more than is required. Six
hours of sleep is sufficient, but a man in the mode of ignorance sleeps
at least ten or twelve hours a day. Such a man appears to be always
dejected and is addicted to intoxicants and sleeping. These are the
symptoms of a person conditioned by the mode of ignorance.

TEXT 9

sattvam sukhe sanjayati
rajah karmani bharata
jnanam avrtya tu tamah
pramade sanjayaty uta

SYNONYMS

sattvam--mode of goodness; sukhe--in happiness; sanjayati--develops;
rajah--mode of passion; karmani--fruits of activities; bharata--O son
of Bharata; jnanam--knowledge; avrtya--covering; tu--but; tamah--the
mode of ignorance; pramade--in madness; sanjayati--develops; uta--it is
said.



TRANSLATION

The mode of goodness conditions one to happiness, passion conditions
him to fruits of action, and ignorance to madness.

PURPORT

A person in the mode of goodness is satisfied by his work or
intellectual pursuit, just as a philosopher, scientist, or educator may
be engaged in a particular field of knowledge and may be satisfied in
that way. A man in the modes of passion and goodness may be engaged in
fruitive activity, he owns as much as he can and spends for good
causes. Sometimes he tries to open hospitals, give to charity
institutions, etc. These are the signs of one in the mode of passion.
And the mode of ignorance covers knowledge. In the mode of ignorance,
whatever one does is neither good for him nor for anyone.

TEXT 10

rajas tamas cabhibhuya
sattvam bhavati bharata
rajah sattvam tamas caiva
tamah sattvam rajas tatha

SYNONYMS

rajah--mode of passion; tamah--mode of ignorance; ca--also; abhibhuya--
also surpassing; sattvam--mode of goodness; bhavati--becomes prominent;
bharata--O son of Bharata; rajah--mode of passion; sattvam--mode of
goodness; tamah--mode of ignorance; ca--also; eva--like that; tamah--
mode of ignorance; sattvam--mode of goodness; rajah--mode of passion;
tatha--as in this.

TRANSLATION

Sometimes the mode of passion becomes prominent, defeating the mode of
goodness, O son of Bharata. And sometimes the mode of goodness defeats
passion, and at other times the mode of ignorance defeats goodness and
passion. In this way there is always competition for supremacy.

PURPORT

When the mode of passion is prominent, the modes of goodness and
ignorance are defeated. When the mode of goodness is prominent, passion
and ignorance are defeated. And when the mode of ignorance is
prominent, passion and goodness are defeated. This competition is
always going on. Therefore, one who is actually intent on advancing in
Krsna consciousness has to transcend these three modes. The prominence
of some certain mode of nature is manifested in one's dealings, in his
activities, in eating, etc. All this will be explained in later
chapters. But if one wants, he can develop, by practice, the mode of
goodness and thus defeat the modes of ignorance and passion. One can
similarly develop the mode of passion and defeat goodness and
ignorance. Or, one can develop the mode of ignorance and defeat
goodness and passion. Although there are these three modes of material
nature, if one is determined, he can be blessed by the mode of
goodness, and by transcending the mode of goodness he can be situated



in pure goodness, which is called the vasudeva state, a state in which
one can understand the science of God. By the manifestation of
particular activities, it can be understood in what mode of nature one
is situated.

TEXT 11

sarva-dvaresu dehe 'smin
prakasa upajayate
jnanam yada tada vidyad
vivrddham sattvam ity uta

SYNONYMS

sarva-dvaresu--all the gates; dehe asmin--in this body; prakasah--
quality of illumination; upajayate--develops; jnanam--knowledge; yada--
when; tada--at that time; vidyat--must know; vivrddham--increased;
sattvam--the mode of goodness; iti--thus; uta--said.

TRANSLATION

The manifestations of the mode of goodness can be experienced when all
the gates of the body are illuminated by knowledge.

PURPORT

There are nine gates in the body: two eyes, two ears, two nostrils, the
mouth, the genitals and the anus. In every gate, when the symptom of
goodness is illuminated, it should be understood that one has developed
the mode of goodness. In the mode of goodness, one can see things in
the right position, one can hear things in the right position, and one
can taste things in the right position. One becomes cleansed inside and
outside. In every gate there is development of the symptoms of
happiness, and that is the position of goodness.

TEXT 12

lobhah pravrttir arambhah
karmanam asamah sprha
rajasy etani jayante
vivrddhe bharatarsabha

SYNONYMS

lobhah--greed; pravrttih--hankering; arambhah--endeavor; karmanam--of
activities; asamah--uncontrollable; sprha--desire; rajasi--in the mode
of passion; etani--all this; jayante--develop; vivrddhe--when there is
excess; bharata-rsabha--O chief of the descendants of Bharata.

TRANSLATION

O chief of the Bharatas, when there is an increase in the mode of
passion, the symptoms of great attachment, uncontrollable desire,
hankering, and intense endeavor develop.

PURPORT



One in the mode of passion is never satisfied with the position he has
already acquired; he hankers to increase his position. If he wants to
construct a residential house, he tries his best to have a palatial
house, as if he would be able to reside in that house eternally. And he
develops a great hankering for sense gratification. There is no end to
sense gratification. He always wants to remain with his family and in
his house and to continue the process of sense gratification. There is
no cessation of this. All these symptoms should be understood as
characteristic of the mode of passion.

TEXT 13

aprakaso 'pravrttis ca
pramado moha eva ca
tamasy etani jayante
vivrddhe kuru-nandana

SYNONYMS

aprakasah--darkness; apravrttih--inactivity; ca--and; pramadah--
madness; mohah--illusion; eva--certainly; ca--also; tamasi--of the mode
of ignorance; etani--these; jayante--are manifested; vivrddhe--is
developed; kuru-nandana--O son of Kuru.

TRANSLATION

O son of Kuru, when there is an increase in the mode of ignorance,
madness, illusion, inertia and darkness are manifested.

PURPORT

When there is no illumination, knowledge is absent. One in the mode of
ignorance does not work by a regulative principle; he wants to act
whimsically for no purpose. Even though he has the capacity to work, he
makes no endeavor. This is called illusion. Although consciousness is
going on, life is inactive. These are the symptoms of one in the mode
of ignorance.

TEXT 14

yada sattve pravrddhe tu
pralayam yati deha-bhrt
tadottama-vidam lokan
amalan pratipadyate

SYNONYMS

yada--when; sattve--mode of goodness; pravrddhe--in development; tu--
but; pralayam--dissolution; yati--goes; deha-bhrt--embodied; tada--at
that time; uttama-vidam--of the great sages; lokan--the planets;
amalan--pure; pratipadyate--attains.

TRANSLATION

When one dies in the mode of goodness, he attains to the pure higher
planets.

PURPORT



One in goodness attains higher planetary systems, like Brahmaloka or
Janoloka, and there enjoys godly happiness. The word amalan is
significant; it means free from the modes of passion and ignorance.
There are impurities in the material world, but the mode of goodness is
the purest form of existence in the material world. There are different
kinds of planets for different kinds of living entities. Those who die
in the mode of goodness are elevated to the planets where great sages
and great devotees live.

TEXT 15

rajasi pralayam gatva
karma-sangisu jayate
tatha pralinas tamasi
mudha-yonisu jayate

SYNONYMS

rajasi--in passion; pralayam--dissolution; gatva--attaining; karma-
sangisu--in the association of fruitive activities; jayate--takes
birth; tatha--thereafter; pralinah--being dissolved; tamasi--in
ignorance; mudha--animal; yonisu--species; jayate--take birth.

TRANSLATION

When one dies in the mode of passion, he takes birth among those
engaged in fruitive activities; and when he dies in the mode of
ignorance, he takes birth in the animal kingdom.

PURPORT

Some people have the impression that when the soul reaches the platform
of human life, it never goes down again. This is incorrect. According
to this verse, if one develops the mode of ignorance, after his death
he is degraded to an animal form of life. From there one has to again
elevate himself, by an evolutionary process, to come again to the human
form of life. Therefore, those who are actually serious about human
life should take to the mode of goodness and in good association
transcend the modes and become situated in Krsna consciousness. This is
the aim of human life. Otherwise, there is no guarantee that the human
being will again attain to the human status.

TEXT 16

karmanah sukrtasyahuh
sattvikam nirmalam phalam
rajasas tu phalam duhkham
ajnanam tamasah phalam

SYNONYMS

karmanah--of work; su-krtasya--in the mode of goodness; ahuh--said;
sattvikam--mode of goodness; nirmalam--purified; phalam--result;
rajasah--of the mode of passion; tu--but; phalam--result; duhkham--
misery; ajnanam--nonsense; tamasah--of the mode of ignorance; phalam--
result.



TRANSLATION

By acting in the mode of goodness, one becomes purified. Works done in
the mode of passion result in distress, and actions performed in the
mode of ignorance result in foolishness.

PURPORT

By pious activities in the mode of goodness one is purified; therefore
the sages, who are free from all illusion, are situated in happiness.
Similarly activities in the mode of passion are simply miserable. Any
activity for material happiness is bound to be defeated. If, for
example, one wants to have a skyscraper, so much human misery has to be
undergone before a big skyscraper can be built. The financier has to
take much trouble to earn a mass of wealth, and those who are slaving
to construct the building have to render physical toil. The miseries
are there. Thus Bhagavad-gita says that in any activity performed under
the spell of the mode of passion, there is definitely great misery.
There may be a little so-called mental happiness--"I have this house or
this money"--but this is not actual happiness.
As far as the mode of ignorance is concerned, the performer is without
knowledge, and therefore all his activities result in present misery,
and afterwards he will go on toward animal life. Animal life is always
miserable, although, under the spell of the illusory energy, maya, the
animals do not understand this. Slaughtering poor animals is also due
to the mode of ignorance. The animal killers do not know that in the
future the animal will have a body suitable to kill them. That is the
law of nature. In human society, if one kills a man he has to be
hanged. That is the law of the state. Because of ignorance, people do
not perceive that there is a complete state controlled by the Supreme
Lord. Every living creature is a son of the Supreme Lord, and He does
not tolerate even an ant's being killed. One has to pay for it. So,
indulgence in animal killing for the taste of the tongue is the
grossest kind of ignorance. A human being has no need to kill animals
because God has supplied so many nice things. If one indulges in meat-
eating anyway, it is to be understood that he is acting in ignorance
and is making his future very dark. Of all kinds of animal killing, the
killing of cows is most vicious because the cow gives us all kinds of
pleasure by supplying milk. Cow slaughter is an act of the grossest
type of ignorance. In the Vedic literature (Rg Veda 9.4.64) the words
gobhih prinita-matsaram indicate that one who, being fully satisfied by
milk, is desirous of killing the cow is, in the grossest ignorance.
There is also a prayer in the Vedic literature that states:

namo brahmanya-devaya
go-brahmana-hitaya ca
jagad-dhitaya krsnaya
govindaya namo namah

"My Lord, You are the well-wisher of the cows and the brahmanas, and
You are the well-wisher of the entire human society and world." (Visnu
Purana 1.19.65) The purport is that special mention is given in that
prayer for the protection of the cows and the brahmanas. Brahmanas are
the symbol of spiritual education, and cows are the symbol of the most
valuable food; these two living creatures, the brahmanas and the cows,
must be given all protection--that is real advancement of civilization.
In modern human society, spiritual knowledge is neglected, and cow
killing is encouraged. It is to be understood, then, that human society



is advancing in the wrong direction and is clearing the path to its own
condemnation. A civilization which guides the citizens to become
animals in their next lives is certainly not a human civilization. The
present human civilization is, of course, grossly misled by the modes
of passion and ignorance. It is a very dangerous age, and all nations
should take care to provide the easiest process, Krsna consciousness,
to save humanity from the greatest danger.

TEXT 17

sattvat sanjayate jnanam
rajaso lobha eva ca
pramada-mohau tamaso
bhavato 'jnanam eva ca

SYNONYMS

sattvat--from the mode of goodness; sanjayate--develops; jnanam--
knowledge; rajasah--from the mode of passion; lobhah--greed; eva--
certainly; ca--also; pramada--madness; mohau--illusion; tamasah--from
the mode of ignorance; bhavatah--develops; ajnanam--nonsense; eva--
certainly; ca--also.

TRANSLATION

From the mode of goodness, real knowledge develops; from the mode of
passion, greed develops; and from the mode of ignorance develop
foolishness, madness and illusion.

PURPORT

Since the present civilization is not very congenial to the living
entities, Krsna consciousness is recommended. Through Krsna
consciousness, society will develop the mode of goodness. When the mode
of goodness is developed, people will see things as they are. In the
mode of ignorance, people are just like animals and cannot see things
clearly. In the mode of ignorance, for example, they do not see that by
killing one animal they are taking a chance of being killed by the same
animal in the next life. Because people have no education in actual
knowledge, they become irresponsible. To stop this irresponsibility,
education for developing the mode of goodness of the people in general
must be there. When they are actually educated in the mode of goodness,
they will become sober, in full knowledge of things as they are. Then
people will be happy and prosperous. Even if the majority of the people
aren't happy and prosperous, if a certain percentage of the population
develops Krsna consciousness and becomes situated in the mode of
goodness, then there is the possibility for peace and prosperity all
over the world. Otherwise, if the world is devoted to the modes of
passion and ignorance, there can be no peace or prosperity. In the mode
of passion, people become greedy, and their hankering for sense
enjoyment has no limit. One can see that even if one has enough money
and adequate arrangement for sense gratification, there is neither
happiness nor peace of mind. That is not possible because one is
situated in the mode of passion. If one wants happiness at all, his
money will not help him; he has to elevate himself to the mode of
goodness by practicing Krsna consciousness. One engaged in the mode of
passion is not only mentally unhappy, but his profession and occupation
are also very troublesome. He has to devise so many plans and schemes



to acquire enough money to maintain his status quo. This is all
miserable. In the mode of ignorance, people become mad. Being
distressed by their circumstances, they take shelter of intoxication,
and thus they sink further into ignorance. Their future in life is very
dark.

TEXT 18

urdhvam gacchanti sattva-stha
madhye tisthanti rajasah
jaghanya-guna-vrtti-stha
adho gacchanti tamasah

SYNONYMS

urdhvam--upwards; gacchanti--go; sattva-sthah--one who is situated in
the mode of goodness; madhye--in the middle; tisthanti--dwell; rajasah-
-those who are situated in the mode of passion; jaghanya--abominable;
guna--quality; vrtti-sthah--occupation; adhah--down; gacchanti--go;
tamasah--people in the mode of ignorance.

TRANSLATION

Those situated in the mode of goodness gradually go upward to the
higher planets; those in the mode of passion live on the earthly
planets; and those in the mode of ignorance go down to the hellish
worlds.

PURPORT

In this verse the results of actions in the three modes of nature are
more explicitly set forth. There is an upper planetary system,
consisting of the heavenly planets, where everyone is highly elevated.
According to the degree of development of the mode of goodness, the
living entity can be transferred to various planets in this system. The
highest planet is Satyaloka, or Brahmaloka, where the prime person of
this universe, Lord Brahma, resides. We have seen already that we can
hardly calculate the wondrous condition of life in Brahmaloka, but the
highest condition of life, the mode of goodness, can bring us to this.
The mode of passion is mixed. It is in the middle, between the modes of
goodness and ignorance. A person is not always pure, but even if he
should be purely in the mode of passion, he will simply remain on this
earth as a king or a rich man. But because there are mixtures, one can
also go down. People on this earth, in the mode of passion or
ignorance, cannot forcibly approach the higher planets by machine. In
the mode of passion, there is also the chance of becoming mad in the
next life.
The lowest quality, the mode of ignorance, is described here as
abominable. The result of developing ignorance is very, very risky. It
is the lowest quality in material nature. Beneath the human level there
are eight million species of life: birds, beasts, reptiles, trees,
etc., and, according to the development of the mode of ignorance,
people are brought down to these abominable conditions. The word
tamasah is very significant here. Tamasah indicates those who stay
continually in the mode of ignorance without rising to a higher mode.
Their future is very dark.
There is an opportunity for men in the modes of ignorance and passion
to be elevated to the mode of goodness, and that system is called Krsna



consciousness. But one who does not take advantage of this opportunity
will certainly continue in the lower modes.

TEXT 19

nanyam gunebhyah kartaram
yada drastanupasyati
gunebhyas ca param vetti
mad-bhavam so 'dhigacchati

SYNONYMS

na--never; anyam--other than; gunebhyah--from the qualities; kartaram--
the performer; yada--when; drasta anupasyati--he who sees properly;
gunebhyah ca--from the modes of nature; param--transcendental; vetti--
know; mat-bhavam--My spiritual nature; sah--he; adhigacchati--is
promoted.

TRANSLATION

When you see that there is nothing beyond these modes of nature in all
activities and that the Supreme Lord is transcendental to all these
modes, then you can know My spiritual nature.

PURPORT

One can transcend all the activities of the modes of material nature
simply by understanding them properly by learning from the proper
souls. The real spiritual master is Krsna, and He is imparting this
spiritual knowledge to Arjuna. Similarly, it is from those who are
fully in Krsna consciousness that one has to learn this science of
activities in terms of the modes of nature. Otherwise, one's life will
be misdirected. By the instruction of a bona fide spiritual master, a
living entity can know of his spiritual position, his material body,
his senses, how he is entrapped, and how he is under the spell of the
material modes of nature. He is helpless, being in the grip of these
modes, but when he can see his real position, then he can attain to the
transcendental platform, having the scope for spiritual life. Actually,
the living entity is not the performer of different activities. He is
forced to act because he is situated in a particular type of body,
conducted by some particular mode of material nature. Unless one has
the help of spiritual authority, he cannot understand in what position
he is actually situated. With the association of a bona fide spiritual
master, he can see his real position, and, by such an understanding, he
can become fixed in full Krsna consciousness. A man in Krsna
consciousness is not controlled by the spell of the material modes of
nature. It has already been stated in the Seventh Chapter that one who
has surrendered to Krsna is relieved from the activities of material
nature. Therefore for one who is able to see things as they are, the
influence of material nature gradually ceases.

TEXT 20

gunan etan atitya trin
dehi deha-samudbhavan
janma-mrtyu-jara-duhkhair
vimukto 'mrtam asnute



SYNONYMS

gunan--qualities; etan--all these; atitya--transcending; trin--three;
dehi--embodied; deha--body; samudbhavan--produced of; janma--birth;
mrtyu--death; jara--old age; duhkhaih--distresses; vimuktah--being
freed from; amrtam--nectar; asnute--enjoys.

TRANSLATION

When the embodied being is able to transcend these three modes, he can
become free from birth, death, old age and their distresses and can
enjoy nectar even in this life.

PURPORT

How one can stay in the transcendental position, even in this body, in
full Krsna consciousness, is explained in this verse. The Sanskrit word
dehi means "embodied." Although one is within this material body, by
his advancement in spiritual knowledge he can be free from the
influence of the modes of nature. He can enjoy the happiness of
spiritual life even in this body because, after leaving this body, he
is certainly going to the spiritual sky. But even in this body he can
enjoy spiritual happiness. In other words, devotional service in Krsna
consciousness is the sign of liberation from material entanglement, and
this will be explained in the Eighteenth Chapter. When one is freed
from the influence of the modes of material nature, he enters into
devotional service.

TEXT 21

arjuna uvaca
kair lingais trin gunan etan
atito bhavati prabho
kim acarah katham caitams
trin gunan ativartate

SYNONYMS

arjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; kaih--by which; lingaih--symptoms; trin--
three; gunan--qualities; etan--all this; atitah--having transcended;
bhavati--become; prabho--my Lord; kim--what; acarah--behavior; katham--
what; ca--also; etan--these; trin--three; gunan--qualities; ativartate-
-transcend.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna inquired: O my Lord, by what symptoms is one known who is
transcendental to those modes? What is his behavior? And how does he
transcend the modes of nature?

PURPORT

In this verse, Arjuna's questions are very appropriate. He wants to
know the symptoms of a person who has already transcended the material
modes. He first inquires of the symptoms of such a transcendental
person. How can one understand that he has already transcended the
influence of the modes of material nature? The second question asks how
he lives and what his activities are. Are they regulated or



nonregulated? Then Arjuna inquires of the means by which he can attain
the transcendental nature. That is very important. Unless one knows the
direct means by which one can be situated always transcendentally,
there is no possibility of showing the symptoms. So all these questions
put by Arjuna are very important, and the Lord answers them.

TEXTS 22-25

sri-bhagavan uvaca
prakasam ca pravrttim ca
moham eva ca pandava
na dvesti sampravrttani
na nivrttani kanksati

udasina-vad asino
gunair yo na vicalyate
guna vartanta ity evam
yo 'vatisthati nengate

sama-duhkha-sukhah sva-sthah
sama-lostasma-kancanah
tulya-priyapriyo dhiras
tulya-nindatma-samstutih

manapamanayos tulyas
tulyo mitrari-paksayoh
sarvarambha-parityagi
gunatitah sa ucyate

SYNONYMS

sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; prakasam
ca--and illumination; pravrttim ca--and attachment; moham--illusion;
eva ca--also; pandava--O son of Pandu; na dvesti--does not hate;
sampravrttani--although developed; na nivrttani--nor stop development;
kanksati--desires; udasina-vat--as if neutral; asinah--situated;
gunaih--by the qualities; yah--one who; na--never; vicalyate--is
agitated; gunah--the qualities; vartante--is situated; iti evam--
knowing thus; yah--one who; avatisthati--remains; na--never; ingate--
flickering; sama--equal; duhkha--in distress; sukhah--in happiness;
sva-sthah--being situated himself; sama--equally; losta--a lump of
earth; asma--stone; kancanah--gold; tulya--equally disposed; priya--
dear; apriyah--undesirable; dhirah--steady; tulya--equally; ninda--in
defamation; atma-samstutih--in praise of himself; mana--in honor;
apamanayoh--dishonor; tulyah--equally; tulyah--equally; mitra--friend;
ari--enemy; paksayoh--in parties; sarva--all; arambha--endeavor;
parityagi--renouncer; guna-atitah--transcendental to the material modes
of nature; sah--he; ucyate--is said to be.

TRANSLATION

The Blessed Lord said: He who does not hate illumination, attachment
and delusion when they are present, nor longs for them when they
disappear; who is seated like one unconcerned, being situated beyond
these material reactions of the modes of nature, who remains firm,
knowing that the modes alone are active; who regards alike pleasure and
pain, and looks on a lump of earth, a stone and a piece of gold with an
equal eye; who is wise and holds praise and blame to be the same; who



is unchanged in honor and dishonor, who treats friend and foe alike,
who has abandoned all fruitive undertakings--such a man is said to have
transcended the modes of nature.

PURPORT

Arjuna submitted three different questions, and the Lord answers them
one after another. In these verses, Krsna first indicates that a person
transcendentally situated neither envies anyone nor hankers for
anything. When a living entity stays in this material world embodied by
the material body, it is to be understood that he is under the control
of one of the three modes of material nature. When he is actually out
of the body, then he is out of the clutches of the material modes of
nature. But as long as he is not out of the material body, he should be
neutral. He should engage himself in the devotional service of the Lord
so that his identity with the material body will automatically be
forgotten. When one is conscious of the material body, he acts only for
sense gratification, but when one transfers the consciousness to Krsna,
sense gratification automatically stops. One does not need this
material body, and he does not need to accept the dictations of the
material body. The qualities of the material modes in the body will
act, but as spirit soul the self is aloof from such activities. How
does he become aloof? He does not desire to enjoy the body, nor does he
desire to get out of it. Thus transcendentally situated, the devotee
becomes automatically free. He need not try to become free from the
influence of the modes of material nature.
The next question concerns the dealings of a transcendentally situated
person. The materially situated person is affected by so-called honor
and dishonor offered to the body, but the transcendentally situated
person is not affected by such false honor and dishonor. He performs
his duty in Krsna consciousness and does not mind whether a man honors
or dishonors him. He accepts things that are favorable for his duty in
Krsna consciousness, otherwise he has no necessity of anything
material, either a stone or gold. He takes everyone as his dear friend
who helps him in his execution of Krsna consciousness, and he does not
hate his so-called enemy. He is equally disposed and sees everything on
an equal level because he knows perfectly well that he has nothing to
do with material existence. Social and political issues do not affect
him because he knows the situation of temporary upheavals and
disturbances. He does not attempt anything for his own sake. He can
attempt anything for Krsna, but for his personal self he does not
attempt anything. By such behavior one becomes actually
transcendentally situated.

TEXT 26

mam ca yo 'vyabhicarena
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa gunan samatityaitan
brahma-bhuyaya kalpate

SYNONYMS

mam--unto Me; ca--also; yah--person; avyabhicarena--without fail;
bhakti-yogena--by devotional service; sevate--renders service; sah--he;
gunan--all the modes of material nature; samatitya--transcending; etan-
-all this; brahma-bhuyaya--to be elevated to the Brahman platform;
kalpate--is considered.



TRANSLATION

One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in
any circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and
thus comes to the level of Brahman.

PURPORT

This verse is a reply to Arjuna's third question: What is the means of
attaining to the transcendental position? As explained before, the
material world is acting under the spell of the modes of material
nature. One should not be disturbed by the activities of the modes of
nature; instead of putting his consciousness into such activities, he
may transfer his consciousness to Krsna activities. Krsna activities
are known as bhakti-yoga--always acting for Krsna. This includes not
only Krsna, but His different plenary expansions such as Rama and
Narayana. He has innumerable expansions. One who is engaged in the
service of any of the forms of Krsna, or of His plenary expansions, is
considered to be transcendentally situated. One should also note that
all the forms of Krsna are fully transcendental, blissful, full of
knowledge and eternal. Such personalities of Godhead are omnipotent and
omniscient, and they possess all transcendental qualities. So, if one
engages himself in the service of Krsna or His plenary expansions with
unfailing determination, although these modes of material nature are
very difficult to overcome, he can overcome them easily. This has
already been explained in the Seventh Chapter. One who surrenders unto
Krsna at once surmounts the influence of the modes of material nature.
To be in Krsna consciousness or in devotional service means to acquire
equality with Krsna. The Lord says that His nature is eternal, blissful
and full of knowledge, and the living entities are part and parcel of
the Supreme, as gold particles are part of a gold mine. Thus the living
entity's spiritual position is as good as gold, as good as Krsna in
quality. The difference of individuality continues, otherwise there is
no question of bhakti-yoga. Bhakti-yoga means that the Lord is there,
the devotee is there and the activity of exchange of love between the
Lord and the devotee is there. Therefore the individuality of two
persons is present in the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the
individual person, otherwise there would be no meaning to bhakti-yoga.
If one is not situated in the same transcendental position with the
Lord, one cannot serve the Supreme Lord. To be a personal assistant to
a king, one must acquire the qualifications. Thus the qualification is
to become Brahman, or freed from all material contamination. It is said
in the Vedic literature, brahmaiva san brahmapy eti. One can attain the
Supreme Brahman by becoming Brahman. This means that one must
qualitatively become one with Brahman. By attainment of Brahman, one
does not lose his eternal Brahman identity as an individual soul.

TEXT 27

brahmano hi pratisthaham
amrtasyavyayasya ca
sasvatasya ca dharmasya
sukhasyaikantikasya ca

SYNONYMS



brahmanah--of the impersonal brahmajyoti; hi--certainly; pratistha--the
rest; aham--I am; amrtasya--of the immortal; avyayasya--of the
imperishable; ca--also; sasvatasya--of the eternal; ca--and; dharmasya-
-of the constitutional position; sukhasya--happiness; aikantikasya--
ultimate; ca--also.

TRANSLATION

And I am the basis of impersonal Brahman, which is the constitutional
position of ultimate happiness, and which is immortal, imperishable and
eternal.

PURPORT

The constitution of Brahman is immortality, imperishability, eternity,
and happiness. Brahman is the beginning of transcendental realization.
Paramatma, the Supersoul, is the middle, the second stage in
transcendental realization, and the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
the ultimate realization of the Absolute Truth. Therefore, both
Paramatma and the impersonal Brahman are within the Supreme Person. It
is explained in the Seventh Chapter that material nature is the
manifestation of the inferior energy of the Supreme Lord. The Lord
impregnates the inferior material nature with fragments of the superior
nature, and that is the spiritual touch in the material nature. When a
living entity conditioned by this material nature begins the
cultivation of spiritual knowledge, he elevates himself from the
position of material existence and gradually rises up to the Brahman
conception of the Supreme. This attainment of the Brahman conception of
life is the first stage in self-realization. At this stage the Brahman-
realized person is transcendental to the material position, but he is
not actually perfect in Brahman realization. If he wants, he can
continue to stay in the Brahman position and then gradually rise up to
Paramatma realization and then to the realization of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. There are many examples of this in Vedic
literature. The four Kumaras were situated first in the impersonal
Brahman conception of truth, but then they gradually rose to the
platform of devotional service. One who cannot elevate himself beyond
the impersonal conception of Brahman runs the risk of falling down. In
Srimad-Bhagavatam it is stated that although a person may rise to the
stage of impersonal Brahman, without going further, with no information
of the Supreme Person, his intelligence is not perfectly clear.
Therefore, in spite of being raised to the Brahman platform, there is
the chance of falling down if one is not engaged in the devotional
service of the Lord. In the Vedic language it is also said, raso vai
sah, rasam hy evayam labdhvanandi bhavati: "When one understands the
Personality of Godhead, the reservoir of pleasure, Krsna, he actually
becomes transcendentally blissful." (Taittiriya Upanisad 2.7.1) The
Supreme Lord is full in six opulences, and when a devotee approaches
Him, there is an exchange of these six opulences. The servant of the
king enjoys on an almost equal level with the king. And so, eternal
happiness, imperishable happiness, and eternal life accompany
devotional service. Therefore, realization of Brahman, or eternity, or
imperishability is included in devotional service. This is already
possessed by a person who is engaged in devotional service.
The living entity, although Brahman by nature, has the desire to lord
it over the material world, and due to this he falls down. In his
constitutional position, a living entity is above the three modes of
material nature, but association with material nature entangles him in



the different modes of material nature, goodness, passion and
ignorance. Due to the association of these three modes, his desire to
dominate the material world is there. By engagement in devotional
service in full Krsna consciousness, he is immediately situated in the
transcendental position, and his unlawful desire to control material
nature is removed. Therefore the process of devotional service begins
with hearing, chanting, remembering--the prescribed nine methods for
realizing devotional service--should be practiced in the association of
devotees. Gradually, by such association, by the influence of the
spiritual master, one's material desire to dominate is removed, and one
becomes firmly situated in the Lord's transcendental loving service.
This method is prescribed from the twenty-second to the last verse of
this chapter. Devotional service to the Lord is very simple: one should
always engage in the service of the Lord, should eat the remnants of
foodstuffs offered to the Deity, smell the flowers offered to the lotus
feet of the Lord, see the places where the Lord had His transcendental
pastimes, read of the different activities of the Lord, His
reciprocation of love with His devotees, chant always the
transcendental vibration Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare
Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare, and observe the
fasting days commemorating the appearances and disappearances of the
Lord and His devotees. By following such a process one becomes
completely detached from all material activities. One who can thus
situate himself in the brahma-jyoti is equal to the Supreme Personality
of Godhead in quality.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Fourteenth Chapter of the
Srimad Bhagavad-gita in the matter of the Three Modes of Material
Nature.

Chapter 15
The Yoga of the Supreme Person

TEXT 1

sri-bhagavan uvaca
urdhva-mulam adhah-sakham
asvattham prahur avyayam
chandamsi yasya parnani
yas tam veda sa veda-vit

SYNONYMS

sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; urdhva-
mulam--with roots above; adhah--downwards; sakham--branches; asvattham-
-banyan tree; prahuh--said; avyayam--eternal; chandamsi--Vedic hymns;
yasya--of which; parnani--the leaves; yah--anyone; tam--that; veda--
knows; sah--he; veda-vit--the knower of the Vedas.

TRANSLATION

The Blessed Lord said: There is a banyan tree which has its roots
upward and its branches down and whose leaves are the Vedic hymns. One
who knows this tree is the knower of the Vedas.

PURPORT



After the discussion of the importance of bhakti-yoga, one may
question, "What about the Vedas?" It is explained in this chapter that
the purpose of Vedic study is to understand Krsna. Therefore one who is
in Krsna consciousness, who is engaged in devotional service, already
knows the Vedas.
The entanglement of this material world is compared here to a banyan
tree. For one who is engaged in fruitive activities, there is no end to
the banyan tree. He wanders from one branch to another, to another, to
another. The tree of this material world has no end, and for one who is
attached to this tree, there is no possibility of liberation. The Vedic
hymns, meant for elevating oneself, are called the leaves of this tree.
This tree's roots grow upward because they begin from where Brahma is
located, the topmost planet of this universe. If one can understand
this indestructible tree of illusion, then one can get out of it.
This process of extrication should be understood. In the previous
chapters it has been explained that there are many processes by which
to get out of the material entanglement. And, up to the Thirteenth
Chapter, we have seen that devotional service to the Supreme Lord is
the best way. Now, the basic principle of devotional service is
detachment from material activities and attachment to the
transcendental service of the Lord. The process of breaking attachment
to the material world is discussed in the beginning of this chapter.
The root of this material existence grows upward. This means that it
begins from the total material substance, from the topmost planet of
the universe. From there, the whole universe is expanded, with so many
branches, representing the various planetary systems. The fruits
represent the results of the living entities' activities, namely,
religion, economic development, sense gratification and liberation.
Now, there is no ready experience in this world of a tree situated with
its branches down and its roots upward, but there is such a thing. That
tree can be found beside a reservoir of water. We can see that the
trees on the bank reflect upon the water with their branches down and
roots up. In other words, the tree of this material world is only a
reflection of the real tree of the spiritual world. This reflection of
the spiritual world is situated on desire, just as a tree's reflection
is situated on water. Desire is the cause of things being situated in
this reflected material light. One who wants to get out of this
material existence must know this tree thoroughly through analytical
study. Then he can cut off his relationship with it.
This tree, being the reflection of the real tree, is an exact replica.
Everything is there in the spiritual world. The impersonalists take
Brahma to be the root of this material tree, and from the root,
according to Sankhya philosophy, come prakrti, purusa, then the three
gunas, then the five gross elements (panca-maha-bhuta), then the ten
senses (dasendriya), mind, etc. In this way they divide up the whole
material world into twenty-four elements. If Brahma is the center of
all manifestations, then this material world is a manifestation of the
center by 180 degrees, and the other 180 degrees constitute the
spiritual world. The material world is the perverted reflection, so the
spiritual world must have the same variegatedness, but in reality. The
prakrti is the external energy of the Supreme Lord, and the purusa is
the Supreme Lord Himself, and that is explained in Bhagavad-gita. Since
this manifestation is material, it is temporary. A reflection is
temporary, for it is sometimes seen and sometimes not seen. But the
origin from whence the reflection is reflected is eternal. The material
reflection of the real tree has to be cut off. When it is said that a
person knows the Vedas, it is assumed that he knows how to cut off
attachment to this material world. If one knows that process, he



actually knows the Vedas. One who is attracted by the ritualistic
formulas of the Vedas is attracted by the beautiful green leaves of the
tree. He does not exactly know the purpose of the Vedas. The purpose of
the Vedas, as disclosed by the Personality of Godhead Himself, is to
cut down this reflected tree and attain the real tree of the spiritual
world.

TEXT 2

adhas cordhvam prasrtas tasya sakha
guna-pravrddha visaya-pravalah
adhas ca mulany anusantatani
karmanubandhini manusya-loke

SYNONYMS

adhah--downward; ca--and; urdhvam--upward; prasrtah--extended; tasya--
its; sakhah--branches; guna--modes of material nature; pravrddhah--
developed; visaya--sense objects; pravalah--twigs; adhah--downward; ca-
-and; mulani--roots; anusantatani--extended; karma--according to work;
anubandhini--bound; manusya-loke--in the world of human society.

TRANSLATION

The branches of this tree extend downward and upward, nourished by the
three modes of material nature. The twigs are the objects of the
senses. This tree also has roots going down, and these are bound to the
fruitive actions of human society.

PURPORT

The description of the banyan tree is further explained here. Its
branches spread in all directions. In the lower parts, there are
variegated manifestations of living entities such as human beings,
animals, horses, cows, dogs, cats, etc. These are situated on the lower
parts of the branches, whereas on the upper parts are higher forms of
living entities: the demigods, Gandharvas and many other higher species
of life. As a tree is nourished by water, so this tree is nourished by
the three modes of material nature. Sometimes we find that a tract of
land is barren for want of sufficient water, and sometimes a tract is
very green; similarly, where the modes of material nature are
proportionately greater in quantity, the different species of life are
manifest in that proportion accordingly.
The twigs of the tree are considered to be the sense objects. By
development of the different modes of nature, we develop different
senses, and, by the senses, we enjoy different varieties of sense
objects. The source of the senses--the ears, the nose, eyes, etc.--is
considered to be the upper twigs, tuned to the enjoyment of different
sense objects. The leaves are sound, form, touch--the sense objects.
The roots, which are subsidiary, are the by-products of different
varieties of suffering and sense enjoyment. Thus we develop attachment
and aversion. The tendencies toward piety and impiety are considered to
be the secondary roots, spreading in all directions. The real root is
from Brahmaloka, and the other roots are in the human planetary
systems. After one enjoys the results of virtuous activities in the
upper planetary systems, he comes down to this earth and renews his
karma, or fruitive activities for promotion. This planet of human
beings is considered the field of activities.



TEXTS 3-4

na rupam asyeha tathopalabhyate
nanto na cadir na ca sampratistha
asvattham enam su-virudha-mulam
asanga-sastrena drdhena chittva

tatah padam tat parimargitavyam
yasmin gata na nivartanti bhuyah
tam eva cadyam purusam prapadye
yatah pravrttih prasrta purani

SYNONYMS

na--not; rupam--form; asya--of this tree; iha--in this; tatha--also;
upalabhyate--can be perceived; na--never; antah--end; na--never; ca--
also; adih--beginning; na--never; ca--also; sampratistha--the
foundation; asvattham--banyan tree; enam--this; su-virudha--strongly;
mulam--rooted; asanga-sastrena--by the weapon of detachment; drdhena--
strong; chittva--by cutting; tatah--thereafter; padam--situation; tat--
that; parimargitavyam--has to be searched out; yasmin--where; gatah--
going; na--never; nivartanti--comes back; bhuyah--again; tam--to Him;
eva--certainly; ca--also; adyam--original; purusam--the Personality of
Godhead; prapadye--surrender; yatah--from whom; pravrttih--beginning;
prasrta--extended; purani--very old.

TRANSLATION

The real form of this tree cannot be perceived in this world. No one
can understand where it ends, where it begins, or where its foundation
is. But with determination one must cut down this tree with the weapon
of detachment. So doing, one must seek that place from which, having
once gone, one never returns, and there surrender to that Supreme
Personality of Godhead from whom everything has began and in whom
everything is abiding since time immemorial.

PURPORT

It is now clearly stated that the real form of this banyan tree cannot
be understood in this material world. Since the root is upwards, the
extension of the real tree is at the other end. No one can see how far
the tree extends, nor can one see the beginning of this tree. Yet one
has to find out the cause. "I am the son of my father, my father is the
son of such and such a person, etc." By searching in this way, one
comes to Brahma, who is generated by the Garbhodakasayi Visnu. Finally,
in this way, when one reaches the Supreme Personality of Godhead, that
is the end of research work. One has to search out the origin of this
tree, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, through the association of
persons who are in knowledge of that Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Then by understanding one becomes gradually detached from this false
reflection of reality, and by knowledge one can cut off the connection
and actually become situated in the real tree.
The word asanga is very important in this connection because the
attachment for sense enjoyment and lording it over material nature is
very strong. Therefore one must learn detachment by discussion of
spiritual science based on authoritative scriptures, and one must hear
from persons who are actually in knowledge. As a result of such



discussion in the association of devotees, one comes to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Then the first thing one must do is surrender
to Him. The description of that place whence going no one returns to
this false reflected tree is given here. The Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Krsna, is the original root from whom everything has emanated.
To gain favor of that Personality of Godhead, one has only to
surrender, and this is a result of performing devotional service by
hearing, chanting, etc. He is the cause of this extension of the
material world. This has already been explained by the Lord Himself:
aham sarvasya prabhavah, "I am the origin of everything." Therefore to
get out of the entanglement of this strong banyan tree of material
life, one must surrender to Krsna. As soon as one surrenders unto
Krsna, he becomes detached automatically from this material extension.

TEXT 5

nirmana-moha jita-sanga-dosa
adhyatma-nitya vinivrtta-kamah
dvandvair vimuktah sukha-duhkha-samjnair
gacchanty amudhah padam avyayam tat

SYNONYMS

nih--without; mana--respect; mohah--illusion; jita--having conquered;
sanga--association; dosah--faulty; adhyatma--spiritual; nityah--
eternity; vinivrtta--associated; kamah--lust; dvandvaih--with duality;
vimuktah--liberated; sukha-duhkha--happiness and distress; samjnaih--
named; gacchanti--attains; amudhah--unbewildered; padam--situation;
avyayam--eternal; tat--that.

TRANSLATION

One who is free from illusion, false prestige, and false association,
who understands the eternal, who is done with material lust and is
freed from the duality of happiness and distress, and who knows how to
surrender unto the Supreme Person, attains to that eternal kingdom.

PURPORT

The surrendering process is described here very nicely. The first
qualification is that one should not be deluded by pride. Because the
conditioned soul is puffed up, thinking himself the lord of material
nature, it is very difficult for him to surrender unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. One should know by the cultivation of real
knowledge that he is not lord of material nature; the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is the Lord. When one is free from delusion
caused by pride, he can begin the process of surrender. For one who is
always expecting some honor in this material world, it is not possible
to surrender to the Supreme Person. Pride is due to illusion, for
although one comes here, stays for a brief time and then goes away, he
has the foolish notion that he is the lord of the world. He thus makes
all things complicated, and he is always in trouble. The whole world
moves under this impression. People are considering that the land, this
earth, belongs to human society, and they have divided the land under
the false impression that they are the proprietors. One has to get out
of this false notion that human society is the proprietor of this
world. When one is freed from such a false notion, he becomes free from
all the false associations caused by familial, social and national



affections. These faulty associations bind one to this material world.
After this stage, one has to develop spiritual knowledge. One has to
cultivate knowledge of what is actually his own and what is actually
not his own. And, when one has an understanding of things as they are,
he becomes free from all dual conceptions such as happiness and
distress, pleasure and pain. He becomes full in knowledge; then it is
possible for him to surrender to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 6

na tad bhasayate suryo
na sasanko na pavakah
yad gatva na nivartante
tad dhama paramam mama

SYNONYMS

na--not; tat--that; bhasayate--illuminates; suryah--the sun; na--nor;
sasankah--the moon; na--nor; pavakah--fire, electricity; yat--where;
gatva--going; na--never; nivartante--comes back; tat dhama--that abode;
paramam--supreme; mama--My.

TRANSLATION

That abode of Mine is not illumined by the sun or moon, nor by
electricity. One who reaches it never returns to this material world.

PURPORT

The spiritual world, the abode of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Krsna--which is known as Krsnaloka, Goloka Vrndavana--is described
here. In the spiritual sky there is no need of sunshine, moonshine,
fire or electricity, because all the planets are self-luminous. We have
only one planet in this universe, the sun, which is self-luminous, but
all the planets in the spiritual sky are self-luminous. The shining
effulgence of all those planets (called Vaikunthas) constitutes the
shining sky known as the brahmajyoti. Actually, the effulgence is
emanating from the planet of Krsna, Goloka Vrndavana. Part of that
shining effulgence is covered by the mahat-tattva, the material world.
Other than this, the major portion of that shining sky is full of
spiritual planets, which are called Vaikunthas, chief of which is
Goloka Vrndavana.
As long as a living entity is in this dark material world, he is in
conditional life, but as soon as he reaches the spiritual sky by
cutting through the false, perverted tree of this material world, he
becomes liberated. Then there is no chance of his coming back here. In
his conditional life, the living entity considers himself to be the
lord of this material world, but in his liberated state he enters into
the spiritual kingdom and becomes an associate of the Supreme Lord.
There he enjoys eternal bliss, eternal life, and full knowledge.
One should be captivated by this information. He should desire to
transfer himself to that eternal world and extricate himself from this
false reflection of reality. For one who is too much attached to this
material world, it is very difficult to cut that attachment, but if he
takes to Krsna consciousness, there is a chance of gradually becoming
detached. One has to associate himself with devotees, those who are in
Krsna consciousness. One should search out a society dedicated to Krsna
consciousness and learn how to discharge devotional service. In this



way he can cut off his attachment to the material world. One cannot
become detached from the attraction of the material world simply by
dressing himself in saffron cloth. He must become attached to the
devotional service of the Lord. Therefore one should take it very
seriously that devotional service as described in the Twelfth Chapter
is the only way to get out of this false representation of the real
tree. In Chapter Fourteen the contamination of all kinds of processes
by material nature is described. Only devotional service is described
as purely transcendental.
The words paramam mama are very important here. Actually every nook and
corner is the property of the Supreme Lord, but the spiritual world is
paramam, full of six opulences. The Katha Upanisad (2.2.15) also
confirms that in the spiritual world there is no need of sunshine or
moonshine (na tatra suryo bhati na candratarakam), for the whole
spiritual sky is illuminated by the internal potency of the Supreme
Lord. That supreme abode can be achieved only by surrender and by no
other means.

TEXT 7

mamaivamso jiva-loke
jiva-bhutah sanatanah
manah-sasthanindriyani
prakrti-sthani karsati

SYNONYMS

mama--My; eva--certainly; amsah--fragmental particles; jiva-loke--world
of conditional life; jiva-bhutah--the conditioned living entity;
sanatanah--eternal; manah--mind; sasthani--six; indriyani--senses;
prakrti--material nature; sthani--situated; karsati--struggling hard.

TRANSLATION

The living entities in this conditioned world are My eternal fragmental
parts. Due to conditioned life, they are struggling very hard with the
six senses, which include the mind.

PURPORT

In this verse the identity of the living being is clearly given. The
living entity is the fragmental part and parcel of the Supreme Lord--
eternally. It is not that he assumes individuality in his conditional
life and in his liberated state becomes one with the Supreme Lord. He
is eternally fragmented. It is clearly said, sanatanah. According to
the Vedic version, the Supreme Lord manifests and expands Himself in
innumerable expansions, of which the primary expansions are called
visnu-tattva and the secondary expansions are called the living
entities. In other words, the visnu-tattva is the personal expansion,
and the living entities are separated expansions. By His personal
expansion, He is manifested in various forms like Lord Rama,
Nrsimhadeva, Visnumurti and all the predominating Deities in the
Vaikuntha planets. The separated expansions, the living entities, are
eternally servitors. The personal expansions of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, the individual identities of the Godhead, are always
present. Similarly, the separated expansions of the living entities
have their identities. As fragmental parts and parcels of the Supreme
Lord, the living entities also have fragmental portions of His



qualities, of which independence is one. Every living entity, as an
individual soul, has his personal individuality and a minute form of
independence. By misuse of that independence one becomes a conditioned
soul, and by proper use of independence he is always liberated. In
either case, he is qualitatively eternal, as the Supreme Lord is. In
his liberated state he is freed from this material condition, and he is
under the engagement of transcendental service unto the Lord; in his
conditioned life he is dominated by the material modes of nature, and
he forgets the transcendental loving service of the Lord. As a result,
he has to struggle very hard to maintain his existence in the material
world.
The living entities, not only the human beings and the cats and dogs,
but even the greater controllers of the material world--Brahma, Lord
Siva and even Visnu--are all parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord.
They are all eternal, not temporary manifestations. The word karsati
(struggling or grappling hard) is very significant. The conditioned
soul is bound up, as though shackled by iron chains. He is bound up by
the false ego, and the mind is the chief agent which is driving him in
this material existence. When the mind is in the mode of goodness, his
activities are good; when the mind is in the mode of passion, his
activities are troublesome; and when the mind is in the mode of
ignorance, he travels in the lower species of life. It is clear,
however, in this verse, that the conditioned soul is covered by the
material body, with the mind and the senses, and when he is liberated
this material covering perishes, but his spiritual body manifests its
individual capacity. The following information is there in the
Madhyandinayana-sruti: sa va esa brahma-nistha idam sariram martyam
atisrjya brahmabhisampadya brahmana pasyati brahmana srnoti
brahmanaivedam sarvam anubhavati. It is stated here that when a living
entity gives up this material embodiment and enters into the spiritual
world, he revives his spiritual body, and in his spiritual body he can
see the Supreme Personality of Godhead face to face. He can hear and
speak to Him face to face, and he can understand the Supreme
Personality as He is. In smrti also it is understood, vasanti yatra
purusah sarve vaikuntha-murtayah: in the spiritual planets everyone
lives in bodies featured like the Supreme Personality of Godhead's. As
far as bodily construction is concerned, there is no difference between
the part and parcel living entities and the expansions of visnu-murti.
In other words, at liberation the living entity gets a spiritual body
by the grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
The word mamaivamsah (fragmental parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord)
is also very significant. The fragmental portion of the Supreme Lord is
not like some material broken part. We have already understood in the
Second Chapter that the spirit cannot be cut into pieces. This fragment
is not materially conceived. It is not like matter, which can be cut
into pieces and joined together again. That conception is not
applicable here, because the Sanskrit word sanatana (eternal) is used.
The fragmental portion is eternal. It is also stated in the beginning
of the Second Chapter that (dehino 'smin yatha dehe) in each and every
individual body the fragmental portion of the Supreme Lord is present.
That fragmental portion, when liberated from the bodily entanglement,
revives its original spiritual body in the spiritual sky in a spiritual
planet and enjoys association with the Supreme Lord. It is, however,
understood here that the living entity, being the fragmental part and
parcel of the Supreme Lord, is qualitatively one with the Lord, just as
the parts and parcels of gold are also gold.

TEXT 8



sariram yad avapnoti
yac capy utkramatisvarah
grhitvaitani samyati
vayur gandhan ivasayat

SYNONYMS

sariram--body; yat--as much as; avapnoti--gets; yat--that which; ca--
also; api--virtually; utkramati--gives up; isvarah--the lord of the
body; grhitva--taking; etani--all these; samyati--goes away; vayuh--
air; gandhan--smell; iva--like; asayat--from the flower.

TRANSLATION

The living entity in the material world carries his different
conceptions of life from one body to another as the air carries aromas.

PURPORT

Here the living entity is described as isvara, the controller of his
own body. If he likes, he can change his body to a higher grade, and if
he likes he can move to a lower class. Minute independence is there.
The change his body undergoes depends upon him. At the time of death,
the consciousness he has created will carry him on to the next type of
body. If he has made his consciousness like that of a cat or dog, he is
sure to change to a cat's or dog's body. And, if he has fixed his
consciousness on godly qualities, he will change into the form of a
demigod. And, if he is in Krsna consciousness, he will be transferred
to Krsnaloka in the spiritual world and will associate with Krsna. It
is a false claim that after the annihilation of this body everything is
finished. The individual soul is transmigrating from one body to
another, and his present body and present activities are the background
of his next body. One gets a different body according to karma, and he
has to quit this body in due course. It is stated here that the subtle
body, which carries the conception of the next body, develops another
body in the next life. This process of transmigrating from one body to
another and struggling while in the body is called karsati or struggle
for existence.

TEXT 9

srotram caksuh sparsanam ca
rasanam ghranam eva ca
adhisthaya manas cayam
visayan upasevate

SYNONYMS

srotram--ears; caksuh--eyes; sparsanam--touch; ca--also; rasanam--
tongue; ghranam--smelling power; eva--also; ca--and; adhisthaya--being
situated; manah--mind; ca--also; ayam--this; visayan--sense objects;
upasevate--enjoys.

TRANSLATION



The living entity, thus taking another gross body, obtains a certain
type of ear, tongue, eye, nose and sense of touch, which are grouped
about the mind. He thus enjoys a particular set of sense objects.

PURPORT

In other words, if the living entity adulterates his consciousness with
the qualities of cats and dogs, in his next life he gets a cat or dog
body and enjoys. Consciousness is originally pure, like water. But if
we mix water with a certain color, it changes. Similarly, consciousness
is pure, for the spirit soul is pure. But consciousness is changed
according to the association of the material qualities. Real
consciousness is Krsna consciousness. When, therefore, one is situated
in Krsna consciousness, he is in his pure life. But if his
consciousness is adulterated by some type of material mentality, in the
next life he gets a corresponding body. He does not necessarily get a
human body again; he can get the body of a cat, dog, hog, demigod or
one of many other forms, for there are 8,400,000 species.

TEXT 10

utkramantam sthitam vapi
bhunjanam va gunanvitam
vimudha nanupasyanti
pasyanti jnana-caksusah

SYNONYMS

utkramantam--quitting the body; sthitam--situated in the body; va api--
either; bhunjanam--enjoying; va--or; guna-anvitam--under the spell of
the modes of material nature; vimudhah--foolish persons; na--never;
anupasyanti--can see; pasyanti--one can see; jnana-caksusah--one who
has the eyes of knowledge.

TRANSLATION

The foolish cannot understand how a living entity can quit his body,
nor can they understand what sort of body he enjoys under the spell of
the modes of nature. But one whose eyes are trained in knowledge can
see all this.

PURPORT

The word jnana-caksusah is very significant. Without knowledge, one
cannot understand how a living entity leaves his present body, nor what
form of body he is going to take in the next life, nor even why he is
living in a particular type of body. This requires a great amount of
knowledge understood from Bhagavad-gita and similar literatures heard
from a bona fide spiritual master. One who is trained to perceive all
these things is fortunate. Every living entity is quitting his body
under certain circumstances; he is living under certain circumstances,
and he is enjoying under certain circumstances under the spell of
material nature. As a result, he is suffering different kinds of
happiness and distress, under the illusion of sense enjoyment. Persons
who are everlastingly fooled by lust and desire lose all power of
understand their change of body and their stay in a particular body.
They cannot comprehend it. Those who have developed spiritual
knowledge, however, can see that the spirit is different from the body



and is changing its body and enjoying in different ways. A person in
such knowledge can understand how the conditioned living entity is
suffering in this material existence. Therefore those who are highly
developed in Krsna consciousness try their best to give this knowledge
to the people in general, for their conditional life is very much
troublesome. They should come out of it and be Krsna conscious and
liberate themselves to transfer to the spiritual world.

TEXT 11

yatanto yoginas cainam
pasyanty atmany avasthitam
yatanto 'py akrtatmano
nainam pasyanty acetasah

SYNONYMS

yatantah--endeavoring; yoginah--transcendentalists; ca--also; enam--
this; pasyanti--can see; atmani--in the self; avasthitam--situated;
yatantah--although endeavoring; api--although; akrta-atmanah--without
self-realization; na--does not; enam--this; pasyanti--can see;
acetasah--undeveloped mind.

TRANSLATION

The endeavoring transcendentalist, who is situated in self-realization,
can see all this clearly. But those who are not situated in self-
realization cannot see what is taking place, though they may try to.

PURPORT

There are many transcendentalists on the path of spiritual self-
realization, but one who is not situated in self-realization cannot see
how things are changing in the body of the living entity. The word
yoginah is significant in this connection. In the present day there are
many so-called yogis, and there are many so-called associations of
yogis, but they are actually blind in the matter of self-realization.
They are simply addicted to some sort of gymnastic exercise and are
satisfied if the body is well-built and healthy. They have no other
information. They are called yatanto 'py akrtatmanah. Even though they
are endeavoring in a so-called yoga system, they are not self-realized.
Such people cannot understand the process of the transmigration of the
soul. Only those who are actually in the yoga system and have realized
the self, the world, and the Supreme Lord, in other words, the bhakti-
yogis, those engaged in pure devotional service in Krsna consciousness,
can understand how things are taking place.

TEXT 12

yad aditya-gatam tejo
jagad bhasayate 'khilam
yac candramasi yac cagnau
tat tejo viddhi mamakam

SYNONYMS

yat--that which; aditya-gatam--in the sunshine; tejah--splendor; jagat-
-the whole world; bhasayate--illuminates; akhilam--entirely; yat--that



which; candramasi--in the moon; yat--that which; ca--also; agnau--in
the fire; tat--that; tejah--splendor; viddhi--understand; mamakam--from
Me.

TRANSLATION

The splendor of the sun, which dissipates the darkness of this whole
world, comes from Me. And the splendor of the moon and the splendor of
fire are also from Me.

PURPORT

The unintelligent cannot understand how things are taking place. The
beginning of knowledge can be established by understanding what the
Lord explains here. Everyone sees the sun, moon, fire and electricity.
One should simply try to understand that the splendor of the sun, the
splendor of the moon, and the splendor of electricity or fire are
coming from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In such a conception of
life, the beginning of Krsna consciousness, lies a great deal of
advancement for the conditioned soul in this material world. The living
entities are essentially the parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord, and
He is giving herewith the hint how they can come back to Godhead, back
to home.
From this verse we can understand that the sun is illuminating the
whole solar system. There are different universes and solar systems,
and there are different suns, moons and planets also, but in each
universe there is only one sun. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (10.21), the
moon is one of the stars (naksatranam aham sasi). Sunlight is due to
the spiritual effulgence in the spiritual sky of the Supreme Lord. With
the rise of the sun, the activities of human beings are set up. They
set fire to prepare their foodstuff, they set fire to start the
factories, etc. So many things are done with the help of fire.
Therefore sunrise, fire and moonlight are so pleasing to the living
entities. Without their help no living entity can live. So if one can
understand that the light and splendor of the sun, moon and fire are
emanating from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, then one's
Krsna consciousness will begin. By the moonshine, all the vegetables
are nourished. The moonshine is so pleasing that people can easily
understand that they are living by the mercy of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead Krsna. Without His mercy there cannot be sun, without His
mercy there cannot be moon, and without His mercy there cannot be fire,
and without the help of sun, moon and fire, no one can live. These are
some thoughts to provoke Krsna consciousness in the conditioned soul.

TEXT 13

gam avisya ca bhutani
dharayamy aham ojasa
pusnami causadhih sarvah
somo bhutva rasatmakah

SYNONYMS

gam--the planets; avisya--entering; ca--also; bhutani--living entities;
dharayami--sustaining; aham--I; ojasa--by My energy; pusnami--
nourishing; ca--and; ausadhih--all vegetables; sarvah--all; somah--the
moon; bhutva--becoming; rasa-atmakah--supplying the juice.



TRANSLATION

I enter into each planet, and by My energy they stay in orbit. I become
the moon and thereby supply the juice of life to all vegetables.

PURPORT

It is understood that all the planets are floating in the air only by
the energy of the Lord. The Lord enters into every atom, every planet,
and every living being. That is discussed in the Brahma-samhita. It is
said there that one plenary portion of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Paramatma, enters into the planets, the universe, the living
entity, and even into the atom. So due to His entrance, everything is
appropriately manifested. When the spirit soul is there, a living man
can float on the water, but when the living spark is out of the body
and the body is dead, it sinks. Of course when it is decomposed it
floats just like straw and other things, but as soon as the man is
dead, he at once sinks in the water. Similarly, all these planets are
floating in space, and this is due to the entrance of the supreme
energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. His energy is sustaining
each planet, just like a handful of dust. If someone holds a handful of
dust, there is no possibility of the dust's falling, but if one throws
it in the air, it will fall down. Similarly, these planets, which are
floating in the air, are actually held in the fist of the universal
form of the Supreme Lord. By His strength and energy, all moving and
unmoving things stay in their place. It is said in the Vedic hymns that
because of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the sun is shining and
the planets are steadily moving. Were it not for Him, all the planets
would scatter, like dust in air, and perish. Similarly, it is due to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead that the moon nourishes all
vegetables. Due to the moon's influence, the vegetables become
delicious. Without the moonshine, the vegetables can neither grow nor
taste succulent. Human society is working, living comfortably and
enjoying food due to the supply from the Supreme Lord. Otherwise,
mankind could not survive. The word rasatmakah is very significant.
Everything becomes palatable by the agency of the Supreme Lord through
the influence of the moon.

TEXT 14

aham vaisvanaro bhutva
praninam deham asritah
pranapana-samayuktah
pacamy annam catur-vidham

SYNONYMS

aham--I; vaisvanarah--by My plenary portion as the digesting fire;
bhutva--becoming; praninam--of all living entities; deham--body;
asritah--situated; prana--outgoing air; apana--down-going air;
samayuktah--keep balance; pacami--digest; annam--foodstuff; catuh-
vidham--four kinds of.

TRANSLATION

I am the fire of digestion in every living body, and I am the air of
life, outgoing and incoming, by which I digest the four kinds of
foodstuff.



PURPORT

According to Ayur-vedic sastra, we understand that there is a fire in
the stomach which digests all food sent there. When the fire is not
blazing, there is no hunger, and when the fire is in order we become
hungry. Sometimes when the fire is not going nicely, treatment is
required. In any case, this fire is representative of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Vedic mantras (Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 5.9.1)
also confirm that the Supreme Lord or Brahman is situated in the form
of fire within the stomach and is digesting all kinds of foodstuff
(ayam agnir vaisvanaro yo 'yam antah puruse yenedam annam pacyate).
Therefore since He is helping the digestion of all kinds of foodstuff,
the living entity is not independent in the eating process. Unless the
Supreme Lord helps him in digesting, there is no possibility of eating.
He thus produces and digests foodstuff, and, by His grace, we are
enjoying life. In the Vedanta-sutra (1.2.27) this is also confirmed.
Sabdadibhyo 'ntah pratisthanac ca: the Lord is situated within the
sound and within the body, within the air and even within the stomach
as the digestive force. There are four kinds of foodstuff, some are
swallowed, some are chewed, some are licked up, and some are sucked,
and He is the digestive force for all of them.

TEXT 15

sarvasya caham hrdi sannivisto
mattah smrtir jnanam apohanam ca
vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyo
vedanta-krd veda-vid eva caham

SYNONYMS

sarvasya--of all living beings; ca--and; aham--I; hrdi--in the heart;
sannivistah--being situated; mattah--from Me; smrtih--remembrance;
jnanam--knowledge; apohanam ca--and forgetfulness; vedaih--by the
Vedas; ca--also; sarvaih--all; aham--I am; eva--certainly; vedyah--
knowable; vedanta-krt--the compiler of the Vedanta; veda-vit--the
knower of the Vedas; eva--certainly; ca--and; aham--I.

TRANSLATION

I am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me come remembrance,
knowledge and forgetfulness. By all the Vedas I am to be known; indeed
I am the compiler of Vedanta, and I am the knower of the Vedas.

PURPORT

The Supreme Lord is situated as Paramatma in everyone's heart, and it
is from Him that all activities are initiated. The living entity
forgets everything of his past life, but he has to act according to the
direction of the Supreme Lord, who is witness to all his work.
Therefore he begins his work according to his past deeds. Required
knowledge is supplied to him, and remembrance is given to him, and he
forgets, also, about his past life. Thus, the Lord is not only all-
pervading; He is also localized in every individual heart. He awards
the different fruitive results. He is not only worshipable as the
impersonal Brahman, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and the
localized Paramatma, but as the form of the incarnation of the Vedas as



well. The Vedas give the right direction to the people so that they can
properly mold their lives and come back to Godhead, back to home. The
Vedas offer knowledge of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, and
Krsna in His incarnation as Vyasadeva is the compiler of the Vedanta-
sutra. The commentation on the Vedanta-sutra by Vyasadeva in the
Srimad-Bhagavatam gives the real understanding of Vedanta-sutra. The
Supreme Lord is so full that for the deliverance of the conditioned
soul He is the supplier and digester of foodstuff, the witness of his
activity, the giver of knowledge in the form of Vedas and as the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, the teacher of the Bhagavad-
gita. He is worshipable by the conditioned soul. Thus God is all-good;
God is all-merciful.
Antah-pravistah sasta jananam. The living entity forgets as soon as he
quits his present body, but he begins his work again, initiated by the
Supreme Lord. Although he forgets, the Lord gives him the intelligence
to renew his work where he ended in his last life. So not only does a
living entity enjoy or suffer in this world according to the dictation
from the Supreme Lord situated locally in the heart, but he receives
the opportunity to understand the Vedas from Him. If one is serious to
understand the Vedic knowledge, then Krsna gives the required
intelligence. Why does He present the Vedic knowledge for
understanding? Because a living entity individually needs to understand
Krsna. Vedic literature confirms this: yo 'sau sarvair vedair giyate.
In all Vedic literature, beginning from the four Vedas, Vedanta-sutra
and the Upanisads and Puranas, the glories of the Supreme Lord are
celebrated. By performing Vedic rituals, discussing the Vedic
philosophy and worshiping the Lord in devotional service, He is
attained. Therefore the purpose of the Vedas is to understand Krsna.
The Vedas give us direction to understand Krsna and the process of
understanding. The ultimate goal is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Vedanta-sutra (1.1.4) confirms this in the following words: tat tu
samanvayat. One can attain perfection by understanding Vedic
literature, and one can understand his relationship with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead by performing the different processes. Thus one
can approach Him and at the end one can attain the supreme goal, who is
no other than the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In this verse,
however, the purpose of the Vedas, the understanding of the Vedas, and
the goal of the Vedas are clearly defined.

TEXT 16

dvav imau purusau loke
ksaras caksara eva ca
ksarah sarvani bhutani
kuta-stho 'ksara ucyate

SYNONYMS

dvau--two; imau--in this (world); purusau--living entities; loke--in
the world; ksarah--fallible; ca--and; aksarah--infallible; eva--
certainly; ca--and; ksarah--the fallible; sarvani--all; bhutani--living
entities; kuta-sthah--in oneness; aksarah--infallible; ucyate--is said.

TRANSLATION

There are two classes of beings, the fallible and the infallible. In
the material world every entity is fallible, and in the spiritual world
every entity is called infallible.



PURPORT

As already explained, the Lord in His incarnation as Vyasadeva compiled
the Vedanta-sutra. Here the Lord is giving, in summary, the contents of
the Vedanta-sutra. He says that the living entities, who are
innumerable, can be divided into two classes--the fallible and the
infallible. The living entities are eternally separated parts and
parcels of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When they are in contact
with the material world, they are called jiva-bhuta, and the Sanskrit
words given here, ksarah sarvani bhutani, mean that they are fallible.
Those who are in oneness with the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
however, are called infallible. Oneness does not mean that they have no
individuality, but that there is no disunity. They are all agreeable to
the purpose of the creation. Of course, in the spiritual world, there
is no such thing as creation, but since the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, as stated in the Vedanta-sutra, is the source of all
emanations, that conception is explained.
According to the statement of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord
Krsna, there are two classes of men. The Vedas give evidence of this,
so there is no doubt about it. The living entities, who are struggling
in this world with the mind and five senses, have their material bodies
which are changing as long as the living entities are conditioned.
One's body changes due to contact with matter; matter is changing, so
the living entity appears to be changing. But in the spiritual world
the body is not made of matter; therefore there is no change. In the
material world the living entity undergoes six changes--birth, growth,
duration, reproduction, then dwindling and vanishing. These are the
changes of the material body. But in the spiritual world the body does
not change; there is no old age, there is no birth, there is no death.
There all exists in oneness. It is more clearly explained as ksarah
sarvani bhutani: any living entity who has come in contact with matter,
beginning from the first created being, Brahma, down to a small ant, is
changing its body; therefore they are all fallible. In the spiritual
world, however, they are always liberated in oneness.

TEXT 17

uttamah purusas tv anyah
paramatmety udahrtah
yo loka-trayam avisya
bibharty avyaya isvarah

SYNONYMS

uttamah--the best; purusah--personality; tu--but; anyah--another;
parama--the supreme; atma--self; iti--thus; udahrtah--is said; yah--one
who; loka--of the universe; trayam--the three divisions; avisya--
entering; bibharti--maintaining; avyayah--inexhaustible; isvarah--the
Lord.

TRANSLATION

Besides these two, there is the greatest living personality, the Lord
Himself, who has entered into these worlds and is maintaining them.

PURPORT



This verse is very nicely expressed in the Katha Upanisad (2.2.13) and
Svetasvatara Upanisad (6.13). It is clearly stated there that above the
innumerable living entities, some of whom are conditioned and some of
whom are liberated, there is the Supreme Personality who is Paramatma.
The Upanisadic verse runs as follows: nityo nityanam cetanas cetananam.
The purport is that amongst all the living entities, both conditioned
and liberated, there is one supreme living personality, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who maintains them and gives them all facility
of enjoyment according to different work. That Supreme Personality of
Godhead is situated in everyone's heart as Paramatma. A wise man who
can understand Him is eligible to attain the perfect peace, not others.
It is incorrect to think of the Supreme Lord and the living entities as
being on the same level or equal in all respects. There is always the
question of superiority and inferiority in their personalities. This
particular word uttama is very significant. No one can surpass the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Loke is also significant because in the
paurusa, a Vedic literature, it is stated, lokyate vedartho 'nena. This
Supreme Lord in His localized aspect as Paramatma explains the purpose
of the Vedas. The following verse also appears in the Vedas (Chandogya
Upanisad 8.12.3):

tavad esa samprasado 'smac
charirat samutthaya param
jyoti-rupam sampadya svena
rupenabhinispadyate sa uttamah purusah.

"The Supersoul coming out of the body enters the impersonal
brahmajyoti; then in His form He remains in His spiritual identity.
That Supreme is called the Supreme Personality." This means that the
Supreme Personality is exhibiting and diffusing His spiritual
effulgence, which is the ultimate illumination. That Supreme
Personality also has a localized aspect as Paramatma. By incarnating
Himself as the son of Satyavati and Parasara, He explains the Vedic
knowledge as Vyasadeva.

TEXT 18

yasmat ksaram atito 'ham
aksarad api cottamah
ato 'smi loke vede ca
prathitah purusottamah

SYNONYMS

yasmat--because; ksaram--the fallible; atitah--transcendental; aham--I;
aksarat--from the infallible; api--better than that; ca--and; uttamah--
the best; atah--therefore; asmi--I am; loke--in the world; vede--in the
Vedic literature; ca--and; prathitah--celebrated; purusa-uttamah--as
the Supreme Personality.

TRANSLATION

Because I am transcendental, beyond both the fallible and the
infallible, and because I am the greatest, I am celebrated both in the
world and in the Vedas as that Supreme Person.

PURPORT



No one can surpass the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna--neither
the conditioned soul nor the liberated soul. He is, therefore, the
greatest of personalities. Now it is clear here that the living
entities and the Supreme Personality of Godhead are individuals. The
difference is that the living entities, either in the conditioned state
or in the liberated state, cannot surpass in quantity the inconceivable
potencies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 19

yo mam evam asammudho
janati purusottamam
sa sarva-vid bhajati mam
sarva-bhavena bharata

SYNONYMS

yah--anyone; mam--unto Me; evam--certainly; asammudhah--without a
doubt; janati--knows; purusa-uttamam--the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; sah--he; sarva-vit--knower of everything; bhajati--renders
devotional service; mam--unto Me; sarva-bhavena--in all respects;
bharata--O son of Bharata.

TRANSLATION

Whoever knows Me as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, without
doubting, is to be understood as the knower of everything, and He
therefore engages himself in full devotional service, O son of Bharata.

PURPORT

There are many philosophical speculations about the constitutional
position of the living entities and the Supreme Absolute Truth. Now in
this verse the Supreme Personality of Godhead clearly explains that
anyone who knows Lord Krsna as the Supreme Person is actually the
knower of everything. The imperfect knower goes on simply speculating
about the Absolute Truth, but the perfect knower, without wasting his
valuable time, engages directly in Krsna consciousness, the devotional
service of the Supreme Lord. Throughout the whole of Bhagavad-gita,
this fact is being stressed at every step. And still there are so many
stubborn commentators on Bhagavad-gita who consider the Supreme
Absolute Truth and the living entities to be one and the same.
The Vedic knowledge is called sruti, learning by aural reception. One
should actually receive the Vedic messages from authorities like Krsna
and His representatives. Here Krsna distinguishes everything very
nicely, and one should hear from this source. Simply to hear like the
hogs is not sufficient; one must be able to understand from the
authorities. It is not that one should simply speculate academically.
One should submissively hear from Bhagavad-gita that these living
entities are always subordinate to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Anyone who is able to understand this, according to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, knows the purpose of the Vedas; no
one else knows the purpose of the Vedas.
The word bhajati is very significant. In many places the word bhajati
is expressed in relationship with the service of the Supreme Lord. If a
person is engaged in full Krsna consciousness in devotional service of
the Lord, it is to be understood that he has understood all the Vedic
knowledge. In the Vaisnava parampara it is said that if one is engaged



in the devotional service of Krsna, then there is no need for any other
spiritual process for understanding the Supreme Absolute Truth. He has
already come to the point, because he is engaged in the devotional
service of the Lord. He has ended all preliminary processes of
understanding; similarly, if anyone, after speculating for hundreds of
thousands of lives, does not come to the point that Krsna is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and that one has to surrender there, all
his speculation for so many years and lives is a useless waste of time.

TEXT 20

iti guhyatamam sastram
idam uktam mayanagha
etad buddhva buddhiman syat
krta-krtyas ca bharata

SYNONYMS

iti--thus; guhya-tamam--the most confidential; sastram--revealed
scripture; idam--this; uktam--disclosed; maya--by Me; anagha--O sinless
one; etat--this; buddhva--understanding; buddhi-man--intelligent; syat-
-one becomes; krta-krtyah--the most perfect; ca--and; bharata--O son of
Bharata.

TRANSLATION

This is the most confidential part of the Vedic scriptures, O sinless
one, and it is disclosed now by Me. Whoever understands this will
become wise, and his endeavors will know perfection.

PURPORT

The Lord clearly explains here that this is the substance of all
revealed scriptures. And one should understand this as it is given by
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus one will become intelligent
and perfect in transcendental knowledge. In other words, by
understanding this philosophy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and
engaging in His transcendental service, everyone can become freed from
all contaminations of the modes of material nature. Devotional service
is a process of spiritual understanding. Wherever devotional service
exists, the material contamination cannot coexist. Devotional service
to the Lord and the Lord Himself are one and the same because they are
spiritual--the internal energy of the Supreme Lord. The Lord is said to
be the sun, and ignorance is called darkness. Where the sun is present,
there is no question of darkness. Therefore, whenever devotional
service is present under the proper guidance of a bona fide spiritual
master, there is no question of ignorance.
Everyone must take to this consciousness of Krsna and engage in
devotional service to become intelligent and purified. Unless one comes
to this position of understanding Krsna and engages in devotional
service, however intelligent he may be in the estimation of some common
man, he is not perfectly intelligent.
The word anagha, by which Arjuna is addressed, is significant. Anagha,
"O sinless one," means that unless one is free from all sinful
reactions it is very difficult to understand Krsna. One has to become
free from all contamination, all sinful activities; then he can
understand. But devotional service is so pure and potent that once one



is engaged in devotional service he automatically comes to the stage of
sinlessness.
While performing devotional service in the association of pure devotees
in full Krsna consciousness, there are certain things which require to
be vanquished altogether. The most important thing one has to surmount
is weakness of the heart. The first falldown is caused by the desire to
lord it over material nature. Thus one gives up the transcendental
loving service of the Supreme Lord. The second weakness of the heart is
that as one increases the propensity of lording it over material
nature, he becomes attached to matter and the possession of matter. The
problems of material existence are due to these weaknesses of the
heart.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Fifteenth Chapter of the
Srimad Bhagavad-gita in the matter of  Purusottama-yoga, the Yoga of
the Supreme Person.

Chapter 16
The Divine And Demoniac Natures

TEXTS 1-3

sri-bhagavan uvaca
abhayam sattva-samsuddhir
jnana-yoga-vyavasthitih
danam damas ca yajnas ca
svadhyayas tapa arjavam

ahimsa satyam akrodhas
tyagah santir apaisunam
daya bhutesv aloluptvam
mardavam hrir acapalam

tejah ksama dhrtih saucam
adroho nati-manita
bhavanti sampadam daivim
abhijatasya bharata

SYNONYMS

sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; abhayam--
fearlessness; sattva-samsuddhih--purification of one's existence;
jnana--knowledge; yoga--of linking up; vyavasthitih--the situation;
danam--charity; damah ca--and controlling the mind; yajnah ca--and
performance of sacrifice; svadhyayah--study of Vedic literature; tapah-
-austerity; arjavam--simplicity; ahimsa--nonviolence; satyam--
truthfulness; akrodhah--freedom from anger; tyagah--renunciation;
santih--tranquillity; apaisunam--aversion to fault-finding; daya--
mercy; bhutesu--towards all living entities; aloluptvam--freedom from
greed; mardavam--gentleness; hrih--modesty; acapalam--determination;
tejah--vigor; ksama--forgiveness; dhrtih--fortitude; saucam--
cleanliness; adrohah--freedom from envy; na--not; ati-manita--
expectation of honor; bhavanti--become; sampadam--qualities; daivim--
transcendental; abhijatasya--of one who is born of; bharata--O son of
Bharata.

TRANSLATION



The Blessed Lord said: Fearlessness, purification of one's existence,
cultivation of spiritual knowledge, charity, self-control, performance
of sacrifice, study of the Vedas, austerity and simplicity;
nonviolence, truthfulness, freedom from anger; renunciation,
tranquillity, aversion to faultfinding, compassion and freedom from
covetousness; gentleness, modesty and steady determination; vigor,
forgiveness, fortitude, cleanliness, freedom from envy and the passion
for honor--these transcendental qualities, O son of Bharata, belong to
godly men endowed with divine nature.

PURPORT

In the beginning of the Fifteenth Chapter, the banyan tree of this
material world was explained. The extra roots coming out of it were
compared to the activities of the living entities, some auspicious,
some inauspicious. In the Ninth Chapter, also, the devas, or godly, and
the asuras, the ungodly, or demons, were explained. Now, according to
Vedic rites, activities in the mode of goodness are considered
auspicious for progress on the path of liberation, and such activities
are known as daivi prakrti, transcendental by nature. Those who are
situated in the transcendental nature make progress on the path of
liberation. For those who are acting in the modes of passion and
ignorance, on the other hand, there is no possibility of liberation.
Either they will have to remain in this material world as human beings,
or they will descend among the species of animals or even lower life
forms. In this Sixteenth Chapter the Lord explains both the
transcendental nature and its attendant qualities and the demoniac
nature and its qualities. He also explains the advantages and
disadvantages of these qualities.
The word abhijatasya in reference to one born of transcendental
qualities or godly tendencies is very significant. To beget a child in
a godly atmosphere is known in the Vedic scriptures as Garbhadhana-
samskara. If the parents want a child in the godly qualities they
should follow the ten principles of the human being. In Bhagavad-gita
we have studied also before that sex life for begetting a good child is
Krsna Himself. Sex life is not condemned provided the process is used
in Krsna consciousness. Those who are in Krsna consciousness at least
should not beget children like cats and dogs but should beget them so
that they may become Krsna conscious after birth. That should be the
advantage of children born of a father or mother absorbed in Krsna
consciousness.
The social institution known as varnasrama-dharma--the institution
dividing society into four divisions or castes--is not meant to divide
human society according to birth. Such divisions are in terms of
educational qualifications. They are to keep the society in a state of
peace and prosperity. The qualities mentioned herein are explained as
transcendental qualities meant for making a person progress in
spiritual understanding so that he can get liberated from the material
world. In the varnasrama institution the sannyasi, or the person in the
renounced order of life, is considered to be the head or the spiritual
master of all the social statuses and orders. A brahmana is considered
to be the spiritual master of the three other sections of a society,
namely, the ksatriyas, the vaisyas and the sudras, but a sannyasi, who
is on the top of the institution, is considered to be the spiritual
master of the brahmanas also. For a sannyasi, the first qualification
should be fearlessness. Because a sannyasi has to be alone without any
support or guarantee of support, he has simply to depend on the mercy
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If he thinks, "After I leave my



connections, who will protect me?" he should not accept the renounced
order of life. One must be fully convinced that Krsna or the Supreme
Personality of Godhead in His localized aspect as Paramatma is always
within, that He is seeing everything and that He always knows what one
intends to do. One must thus have firm conviction that Krsna as
Paramatma will take care of a soul surrendered to Him. "I shall never
be alone," one should think. "Even if I live in the darkest regions of
a forest I shall be accompanied by Krsna, and He will give me all
protection." That conviction is called abhayam, without fear. This
state of mind is necessary for a person in the renounced order of life.
Then he has to purify his existence. There are so many rules and
regulations to be followed in the renounced order of life. Most
important of all, a sannyasi is strictly forbidden to have any intimate
relationship with a woman. He is even forbidden to talk with a woman in
a secluded place. Lord Caitanya was an ideal sannyasi, and when He was
at Puri His feminine devotees could not even come near to offer their
respects. They were advised to bow down from a distant place. This is
not a sign of hatred for women as a class, but it is a stricture
imposed on the sannyasi not to have close connections with women. One
has to follow the rules and regulations of a particular status of life
in order to purify his existence. For a sannyasi, intimate relations
with women and possession of wealth for sense gratification are
strictly forbidden. The ideal sannyasi was Lord Caitanya Himself, and
we can learn from His life that He was very strict in regards to women.
Although He is considered to be the most liberal incarnation of
Godhead, accepting the most fallen conditioned souls, He strictly
followed the rules and regulations of the sannyasa order of life in
connection with association with woman. One of His personal associates,
namely Chota Haridasa, was personally associated with Lord Caitanya
along with His other confidential personal associates, but somehow or
other this Chota Haridasa looked lustily on a young woman, and Lord
Caitanya was so strict that He at once rejected him from the society of
His personal associates. Lord Caitanya said, "For a sannyasi or anyone
who is aspiring to get out of the clutches of material nature and
trying to elevate himself to the spiritual nature and go back home,
back to Godhead, for him, looking toward material possessions and women
for sense gratification--not even enjoying them, but just looking
toward them with such a propensity--is so condemned that he had better
commit suicide before experiencing such illicit desires." So these are
the processes for purification.
The next item is jnana-yoga-vyavasthiti: being engaged in the
cultivation of knowledge. Sannyasi life is meant for distributing
knowledge to the householders and others who have forgotten their real
life of spiritual advancement. A sannyasi is supposed to beg from door
to door for his livelihood, but this does not mean that he is a beggar.
Humility is also one of the qualifications of a transcendentally
situated person, and out of sheer humility the sannyasi goes from door
to door, not exactly for the purpose of begging, but to see the
householders and awaken them to Krsna consciousness. This is the duty
of a sannyasi. If he is actually advanced and so ordered by his
spiritual master, he should preach Krsna consciousness with logic and
understanding, and if he is not so advanced he should not accept the
renounced order of life. But even if he has accepted the renounced
order of life without sufficient knowledge, he should engage himself
fully in hearing from a bona fide spiritual master to cultivate
knowledge. A sannyasi, or one in the renounced order of life, must be
situated in fearlessness, sattva-samsuddhi (purity) and jnana-yoga
(knowledge).



The next item is charity. Charity is meant for the householders. The
householders should earn a livelihood by an honorable means and spend
fifty percent of their income to propagate Krsna consciousness all over
the world. Thus a householder should give in charity to such
institutional societies that are engaged in that way. Charity should be
given to the right receiver. There are different kinds of charities, as
will be explained later on, charity in the modes of goodness, passion
and ignorance. Charity in the mode of goodness is recommended by the
scriptures, but charity in the modes of passion and ignorance is not
recommended because it is simply a waste of money. Charity should be
given only to propagate Krsna consciousness all over the world. That is
charity in the mode of goodness.
Then as far as dama (self-control) is concerned, it is not only meant
for other orders of religious society, but it is especially meant for
the householder. Although he has a wife, a householder should not use
his senses for sex life unnecessarily. There are restrictions for the
householders even in sex life, which should only be engaged in for the
propagation of children. If he does not require children, he should not
enjoy sex life with his wife. Modern society enjoys sex life with
contraceptive methods or more abominable methods to avoid the
responsibility of children. This is not in the transcendental quality
but is demoniac. If anyone, even if he is a householder, wants to make
progress in spiritual life, he must control his sex life and should not
beget a child without the purpose of serving Krsna. If he is able to
beget children who will be in Krsna consciousness, one can produce
hundreds of children, but without this capacity one should not indulge
only for sense pleasure.
Sacrifice is another item to be performed by the householders because
sacrifices require a large amount of money. Other orders of life,
namely brahmacarya, vanaprastha and sannyasa, have no money; they live
by begging. So performance of different types of sacrifice is meant for
the householder. They should perform agni-hotra sacrifices as enjoined
in the Vedic literature, but such sacrifices at the present moment are
very expensive, and it is not possible for any householder to perform
them. The best sacrifice recommended in this age is called sankirtana-
yajna, the chanting of Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. This is the best and most
inexpensive sacrifice; everyone can adopt it and derive benefit. So
these three items, namely charity, sense control and performance of
sacrifice, are meant for the householder.
Then svadhyaya, Vedic study, and tapas, austerity, and arjavam,
gentleness or simplicity, are meant for brahmacarya or student life.
Brahmacaris should have no connection with women; they should live a
life of celibacy and engage the mind in the study of Vedic literature
for cultivation of spiritual knowledge. This is called svadhyaya.
Tapas or austerity, is especially meant for the retired life. One must
not remain a householder throughout his whole life; he must always
remember that there are four divisions of life, brahmacarya, grhastha,
vanaprastha and sannyasa. So after grhastha, householder life, one
should retire. If one lives for a hundred years, he should spend
twenty-five years in student life, twenty-five in householder life,
twenty-five in retired life and twenty-five in the renounced order of
life. These are the regulations of the Vedic religious discipline. A
man retired from household life must practice austerities of the body,
mind and tongue. That is tapasya. The entire varnasrama-dharma society
is meant for tapasya. Without tapasya or austerity, no human being can
get liberation. The theory that there is no need of austerity in life,
that one can go on speculating and everything will be nice, is neither



recommended in the Vedic literature nor in Bhagavad-gita. Such theories
are manufactured by show-bottle spiritualists who are trying to gather
more followers. If there are restrictions, rules and regulations,
people will not become attracted. Therefore those who want followers in
the name of religion, just to have a show only, don't restrict the
lives of their students nor their own lives. But that method is not
approved by the Vedas.
As far as simplicity is concerned, not only should a particular order
of life follow this principle, but every member, be he in the
brahmacari asrama, or grhastha asrama, or vanaprastha asrama or
sannyasa asrama. One must live very simply.
Ahimsa means not arresting the progressive life of any living entity.
One should not think that since the spirit spark is never killed even
after the killing of the body there is no harm in killing animals for
sense gratification. People are now addicted to eating animals, in
spite of having an ample supply of grains, fruits and milk. There is no
necessity for animal killing. This injunction is for everyone. When
there is no other alternative, one may kill an animal, but it should be
offered in sacrifice. At any rate, when there is an ample food supply
for humanity, persons who are desiring to make advancement in spiritual
realization should not commit violence to animals. Real ahimsa means
not checking anyone's progressive life. The animals are also making
progress in their evolutionary life by transmigrating from one category
of animal life to another. If a particular animal is killed, then his
progress is checked. If an animal is staying in a particular body for
so many days or so many years and is untimely killed, then he has to
come back again in that form of life to complete the remaining days in
order to be promoted to another species of life. So their progress
should not be checked simply to satisfy one's palate. This is called
ahimsa.
Satyam. This word means that one should not distort the truth for some
personal interest. In Vedic literature there are some difficult
passages, but the meaning or the purpose should be learned from a bona
fide spiritual master. That is the process for understanding the Vedas.
Sruti means that one should hear from the authority. One should not
construe some interpretation for his personal interest. There are so
many commentaries on Bhagavad-gita that misinterpret the original text.
The real import of the word should be presented, and that should be
learned from a bona fide spiritual master.
Akrodha means to check anger. Even if there is provocation one should
be tolerant, for once one becomes angry his whole body becomes
polluted. Anger is a product of the modes of passion and lust, so one
who is transcendentally situated should check himself from anger.
Apaisunam means that one should not find fault with others or correct
them unnecessarily. Of course to call a thief a thief is not
faultfinding, but to call an honest person a thief is very much
offensive for one who is making advancement in spiritual life. Hri
means that one should be very modest and must not perform some act
which is abominable. Acapalam, determination, means that one should not
be agitated or frustrated in some attempt. There may be failure in some
attempt, but one should not be sorry for that; he should make progress
with patience and determination.
The word tejas used here is meant for the ksatriyas. The ksatriyas
should always be very strong to be able to give protection to the weak.
They should not pose themselves as nonviolent. If violence is required,
they must exhibit it.
Saucam means cleanliness, not only in mind and body but in one's
dealings also. It is especially meant for the mercantile people, who



should not deal in the black market. Nati-manita, not expecting honor,
applies to the sudras, the worker class, who are considered, according
to Vedic injunctions, to be the lowest of the four classes. They should
not be puffed up with unnecessary prestige or honor and should remain
in their own status. It is the duty of the sudras to offer respect to
the higher classes for the upkeep of the social order.
All these twenty-six qualifications mentioned are transcendental
qualities. They should be cultivated according to the different
statuses of the social order. The purport is that even though material
conditions are miserable, if these qualities are developed by practice,
by all classes of men, then gradually it is possible to rise to the
highest platform of transcendental realization.

TEXT 4

dambho darpo 'bhimanas ca
krodhah parusyam eva ca
ajnanam cabhijatasya
partha sampadam asurim

SYNONYMS

dambhah--pride; darpah--arrogance; abhimanah--conceit; ca--and;
krodhah--anger; parusyam--harshness; eva--certainly; ca--and; ajnanam--
ignorance; ca--and; abhijatasya--one who is born of; partha--O son of
Prtha; sampadam--nature; asurim--demoniac.

TRANSLATION

Arrogance, pride, anger, conceit, harshness and ignorance--these
qualities belong to those of demoniac nature, O son of Prtha.

PURPORT

In this verse, the royal road to hell is described. The demoniac want
to make a show of religion and advancement in spiritual science,
although they do not follow the principles. They are always arrogant
and proud in possessing some type of education or so much wealth. They
desire to be worshiped by others, and demand respectability, although
they do not command respect. Over trifles they become very angry and
speak harshly, not gently. They do not know what should be done and
what should not be done. They do everything whimsically, according to
their own desire, and they do not recognize any authority. These
demoniac qualities are taken on by them from the beginning of their
bodies in the wombs of their mothers, and as they grow they manifest
all these inauspicious qualities.

TEXT 5

daivi sampad vimoksaya
nibandhayasuri mata
ma sucah sampadam daivim
abhijato 'si pandava

SYNONYMS

daivi--transcendental; sampat--nature; vimoksaya--meant for liberation;
nibandhaya--for bondage; asuri--demoniac qualities; mata--it is



considered; ma--do not; sucah--worry; sampadam--nature; daivim--
transcendental; abhijatah--born; asi--you are; pandava--O son of Pandu.

TRANSLATION

The transcendental qualities are conducive to liberation, whereas the
demoniac qualities make for bondage. Do not worry, O son of Pandu, for
you are born with the divine qualities.

PURPORT

Lord Krsna encouraged Arjuna by telling him that he was not born with
demoniac qualities. His involvement in the fight was not demoniac
because he was considering the pros and cons. He was considering
whether respectable persons such as Bhisma and Drona should be killed
or not, so he was not acting under the influence of anger, false
prestige, or harshness. Therefore he was not of the quality of the
demons. For a ksatriya, a military man, shooting arrows at the enemy is
considered transcendental, and refraining from such a duty is demoniac.
Therefore, there was no cause for Arjuna to lament. Anyone who performs
the regulative principles of the different orders of life is
transcendentally situated.

TEXT 6

dvau bhuta-sargau loke 'smin
daiva asura eva ca
daivo vistarasah prokta
asuram partha me srnu

SYNONYMS

dvau--two; bhuta-sargau--created living beings; loke--in the world;
asmin--this; daivah--godly; asurah--demoniac; eva--certainly; ca--and;
daivah--divine; vistarasah--at great length; proktah--said; asuram--
demoniac; partha--O son of Prtha; me--from Me; srnu--just hear.

TRANSLATION

O son of Prtha, in this world there are two kinds of created beings.
One is called the divine and the other demoniac. I have already
explained to you at length the divine qualities. Now hear from Me of
the demoniac.

PURPORT

Lord Krsna, having assured Arjuna that he was born with the divine
qualities, is now describing the demoniac way. The conditioned living
entities are divided into two classes in this world. Those who are born
with divine qualities follow a regulated life; that is to say they
abide by the injunctions in scriptures and by the authorities. One
should perform duties in the light of authoritative scripture. This
mentality is called divine. One who does not follow the regulative
principles as they are laid down in the scriptures and who acts
according to his whims is called demoniac or asuric. There is no other
criterion but obedience to the regulative principles of scriptures. It
is mentioned in Vedic literature that both the demigods and the demons



are born of the Prajapati; the only difference is that one class obeys
the Vedic injunctions and the other does not.

TEXT 7

pravrttim ca nivrttim ca
jana na vidur asurah
na saucam napi cacaro
na satyam tesu vidyate

SYNONYMS

pravrttim--proper action; ca--also; nivrttim--improper action; ca--and;
janah--persons; na--never; viduh--know; asurah--demoniac qualities; na-
-never; saucam--cleanliness; na--nor; api--also; ca--and; acarah--
behavior; na--never; satyam--truth; tesu--in them; vidyate--there is.

TRANSLATION

Those who are demoniac do not know what is to be done and what is not
to be done. Neither cleanliness nor proper behavior nor truth is found
in them.

PURPORT

In every civilized human society there is some set of scriptural rules
and regulations which are followed from the beginning, especially among
the Aryans, those who adopt the Vedic civilization and who are known as
the most advanced civilized people. Those who do not follow the
scriptural injunctions are supposed to be demons. Therefore it is
stated here that the demons do not know the scriptural rules, nor do
they have any inclination to follow them. Most of them do not know
them, and even if some of them know, they do not have the tendency to
follow them. They have no faith, nor are they willing to act in terms
of the Vedic injunctions. The demons are not clean, either externally
or internally. One should always be careful to keep his body clean by
bathing, brushing teeth, shaving, changing clothes, etc. As far as
internal cleanliness is concerned, one should always remember the holy
names of God and chant Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. The demons neither like nor
follow all these rules for external and internal cleanliness.
As for behavior, there are many rules and regulations guiding human
behavior, such as the Manu-samhita, which is the law of the human race.
Even up to today, those who are Hindu follow the Manu-samhita. Laws of
inheritance and other legalities are derived from this book. Now, in
the Manu-samhita, it is clearly stated that a woman should not be given
freedom. That does not mean that women are to be kept as slaves, but
they are like children. Children are not given freedom, but that does
not mean that they are kept as slaves. The demons have now neglected
such injunctions, and they think that women should be given as much
freedom as men. However, this has not improved the social condition of
the world. Actually, a woman should be given protection at every stage
of life. She should be given protection by the father in her younger
days, by the husband in her youth, and by the grown-up sons in her old
age. This is proper social behavior according to the Manu-samhita. But
modern education has artificially devised a puffed-up concept of
womanly life, and therefore marriage is practically now an imagination
in human society. Nor is the moral condition of women very good now.



The demons, therefore, do not accept any instruction which is good for
society, and because they do not follow the experience of great sages
and the rules and regulations laid down by the sages, the social
condition of the demoniac people is very miserable.

TEXT 8

asatyam apratistham te
jagad ahur anisvaram
aparaspara-sambhutam
kim anyat kama-haitukam

SYNONYMS

asatyam--unreal; apratistham--without foundation; te--they; jagat--the
cosmic manifestation; ahuh--is said; anisvaram--with no controller;
aparaspara--by mutual lust; sambhutam--cause; kim anyat--there is no
other cause; kama-haitukam--it is due to lust only.

TRANSLATION

They say that this world is unreal, that there is no foundation and
that there is no God in control. It is produced of sex desire, and has
no cause other than lust.

PURPORT

The demonic conclude that the world is phantasmagoria. There is no
cause, no effect, no controller, no purpose: everything is unreal. They
say that this cosmic manifestation arises due to chance material
actions and reactions. They do not think that the world was created by
God for a certain purpose. They have their own theory: that the world
has come about in its own way and that there is no reason to believe
that there is a God behind it. For them there is no difference between
spirit and matter, and they do not accept the Supreme Spirit.
Everything is matter only, and the whole cosmos is supposed to be a
mass of ignorance. According to them, everything is void, and whatever
manifestation exists is due to our ignorance in perception. They take
it for granted that all manifestation of diversity is a display of
ignorance. Just as in a dream we may create so many things which
actually have no existence, so when we are awake we shall see that
everything is simply a dream. But factually, although the demons say
that life is a dream, they are very expert in enjoying this dream. And
so, instead of acquiring knowledge, they become more and more
implicated in their dreamland. They conclude that as a child is simply
the result of sexual intercourse between man and woman, this world is
born without any soul. For them it is only a combination of matter that
has produced the living entities, and there is no question of the
existence of the soul. As many living creatures come out from
perspiration and from a dead body without any cause, similarly, the
whole living world has come out of the material combinations of the
cosmic manifestation. Therefore material nature is the cause of this
manifestation, and there is no other cause. They do not believe in the
words of Krsna in Bhagavad-gita: mayadhyaksena prakrtih suyate sa-
caracaram. "Under My direction the whole material world is moving." In
other words, amongst the demons there is no perfect knowledge of the
creation of the world; every one of them has some particular theory of
his own. According to them, one interpretation of the scriptures is as



good as another, for they do not believe in a standard understanding of
the scriptural injunctions.

TEXT 9

etam drstim avastabhya
nastatmano 'lpa-buddhayah
prabhavanty ugra-karmanah
ksayaya jagato 'hitah

SYNONYMS

etam--thus; drstim--vision; avastabhya--accepting; nasta--lost;
atmanah--self; alpa-buddhayah--less intelligent; prabhavanti--flourish;
ugra-karmanah--in painful activities; ksayaya--for destruction;
jagatah--of the world; ahitah--unbeneficial.

TRANSLATION

Following such conclusions, the demoniac, who are lost to themselves
and who have no intelligence, engage in unbeneficial, horrible works
meant to destroy the world.

PURPORT

The demoniac are engaged in activities that will lead the world to
destruction. The Lord states here that they are less intelligent. The
materialists, who have no concept of God, think that they are
advancing. But, according to Bhagavad-gita, they are unintelligent and
devoid of all sense. They try to enjoy this material world to the
utmost limit and therefore always engage in inventing something for
sense gratification. Such materialistic inventions are considered to be
advancement of human civilization, but the result is that people grow
more and more violent and more and more cruel, cruel to animals and
cruel to other human beings. They have no idea how to behave toward one
another. Animal killing is very prominent amongst demoniac people. Such
people are considered the enemies of the world because ultimately they
will invent or create something which will bring destruction to all.
Indirectly, this verse anticipates the invention of nuclear weapons, of
which the whole world today is very proud. At any moment war may take
place, and these atomic weapons may create havoc. Such things are
created solely for the destruction of the world, and this is indicated
here. Due to godlessness, such weapons are invented in human society;
they are not meant for the peace and prosperity of the world.

TEXT 10

kamam asritya duspuram
dambha-mana-madanvitah
mohad grhitvasad-grahan
pravartante 'suci-vratah

SYNONYMS

kamam--lust; asritya--taking shelter of; duspuram--insatiable; dambha--
pride; mana--false prestige; mada-anvitah--absorbed in conceit; mohat--
by illusion; grhitva--taking; asat--nonpermanent; grahan--things;
pravartante--flourish; asuci--unclean; vratah--avowed.



TRANSLATION

The demoniac, taking shelter of insatiable lust, pride and false
prestige, and being thus illusioned, are always sworn to unclean work,
attracted by the impermanent.

PURPORT

The demoniac mentality is described here. The demons lust is never
satiated. They will go on increasing and increasing their insatiable
desires for material enjoyment. Although they are always full of
anxieties on account of accepting nonpermanent things, they still
continue to engage in such activities out of illusion. They have no
knowledge and cannot tell that they are heading the wrong way.
Accepting nonpermanent things, such demoniac people create their own
God, create their own hymns and chant accordingly. The result is that
they become more and more attracted to two things--sex enjoyment and
accumulation of material wealth. The word asuci-vratah, "unclean vows,"
is very significant in this connection. Such demoniac people are only
attracted by wine, women, gambling and meat-eating; those are their
asuci, unclean habits. Induced by pride and false prestige, they create
some principles of religion which are not approved by the Vedic
injunctions. Although such demoniac people are most abominable in the
world, still, by artificial means the world creates a false honor for
them. Although they are gliding toward hell, they consider themselves
very much advanced.

TEXTS 11-12

cintam aparimeyam ca
pralayantam upasritah
kamopabhoga-parama
etavad iti niscitah

asa-pasa-satair baddhah
kama-krodha-parayanah
ihante kama-bhogartham
anyayenartha-sancayan

SYNONYMS

cintam--fears and anxieties; aparimeyam--unmeasurable; ca--and;
pralaya-antam--unto the point of death; upasritah--having taken shelter
of them; kama-upabhoga--sense gratification; paramah--the highest goal
of life; etavat--thus; iti--in this way; niscitah--ascertained; asa-
pasa--entanglements in the network of hope; sataih--by hundreds;
baddhah--being bound; kama--lust; krodha--anger; parayanah--always
situated in that mentality; ihante--desire; kama--lust; bhoga--sense
enjoyment; artham--for that purpose; anyayena--illegally; artha--
wealth; sancayan--accumulate.

TRANSLATION

They believe that to gratify the senses unto the end of life is the
prime necessity of human civilization. Thus there is no end to their
anxiety. Bound by hundreds and thousands of desires, by lust and anger,
they secure money by illegal means for sense gratification.



PURPORT

The demoniac accept that the enjoyment of the senses is the ultimate
goal of life, and this concept they maintain until death. They do not
believe in life after death, and they do not believe that one takes on
different types of bodies according to one's karma, or activities in
this world. Their plans for life are never finished, and they go on
preparing plan after plan, all of which are never finished. We have
personal experience of a person of such demoniac mentality, who, even
at the point of death, was requesting the physician to prolong his life
for four years more because his plans were not yet complete. Such
foolish people do not know that a physician cannot prolong life even
for a moment. When the notice is there, there is no consideration of
the man's desire. The laws of nature do not allow a second beyond what
one is destined to enjoy.
The demoniac person, who has no faith in God or the Supersoul within
himself, performs all kinds of sinful activities simply for sense
gratification. He does not know that there is a witness sitting within
his heart. The Supersoul is observing the activities of the individual
soul. As it is stated in the Upanisads, there are two birds sitting in
one tree; one is acting and enjoying or suffering the fruits of the
branches, and the other is witnessing. But one who is demoniac has no
knowledge of Vedic scripture, nor has he any faith; therefore he feels
free to do anything for sense enjoyment, regardless of the
consequences.

TEXTS 13-15

idam adya maya labdham
imam prapsye manoratham
idam astidam api me
bhavisyati punar dhanam

asau maya hatah satrur
hanisye caparan api
isvaro 'ham aham bhogi
siddho 'ham balavan sukhi

adhyo 'bhijanavan asmi
ko 'nyo 'sti sadrso maya
yaksye dasyami modisya
ity ajnana-vimohitah

SYNONYMS

idam--this; adya--today; maya--by me; labdham--gained; imam--this;
prapsye--I shall gain; manah-ratham--according to my desires; idam--
this; asti--there is; idam--this; api--also; me--mine; bhavisyati--will
increase in the future; punah--again; dhanam--wealth; asau--that; maya-
-by me; hatah--has been killed; satruh--enemy; hanisye--I shall kill;
ca--also; aparan--others; api--certainly; isvarah--the lord; aham--I
am; aham--I am; bhogi--the enjoyer; siddhah--perfect; aham--I am; bala-
van--powerful; sukhi--happy; adhyah--wealthy; abhijana-van--surrounded
by aristocratic relatives; asmi--I am; kah--who else; anyah--other;
asti--there is; sadrsah--like; maya--me; yaksye--I shall sacrifice;
dasyami--I shall give charity; modisye--I shall rejoice; iti--thus;
ajnana--by ignorance; vimohitah--deluded by.



TRANSLATION

The demoniac person thinks: "So much wealth do I have today, and I will
gain more according to my schemes. So much is mine now, and it will
increase in the future, more and more. He is my enemy, and I have
killed him; and my other enemies will also be killed. I am the lord of
everything. I am the enjoyer. I am perfect, powerful and happy. I am
the richest man, surrounded by aristocratic relatives. There is none so
powerful and happy as I am. I shall perform sacrifices, I shall give
some charity, and thus I shall rejoice." In this way, such persons are
deluded by ignorance.

TEXT 16

aneka-citta-vibhranta
moha-jala-samavrtah
prasaktah kama-bhogesu
patanti narake 'sucau

SYNONYMS

aneka--numerous; citta vibhrantah--perplexed by anxieties; moha--of
illusions; jala--by a network; samavrtah--surrounded; prasaktah--
attached; kama--lust; bhogesu--sense gratification; patanti--glides
down; narake--into hell; asucau--unclean.

TRANSLATION

Thus perplexed by various anxieties and bound by a network of
illusions, one becomes too strongly attached to sense enjoyment and
falls down into hell.

PURPORT

The demoniac man knows no limit to his desire to acquire money. That is
unlimited. He only thinks how much assessment he has just now and
schemes to engage that stock of wealth further and further. For that
reason, he does not hesitate to act in any sinful way and so deals in
the black market for illegal gratification. He is enamored by the
possessions he has already, such as land, family, house and bank
balance, and he is always planning to improve them. He believes in his
own strength, and he does not know that whatever he is gaining is due
to his past good deeds. He is given an opportunity to accumulate such
things, but he has no conception of past causes. He simply thinks that
all his mass of wealth is due to his own endeavor. A demoniac person
believes in the strength of his personal work, not in the law of karma.
According to the law of karma, a man takes his birth in a high family,
or becomes rich, or very well educated, or very beautiful because of
good work in the past. The demoniac think that all these things are
accidental and due to the strength of his personal ability. He does not
sense any arrangement behind all the varieties of people, beauty and
education. Anyone who comes into competition with such a demoniac man
is his enemy. There are many demoniac people, and each is enemy to the
others. This enmity becomes more and more deep--between persons, then
between families, then between societies, and at last between nations.
Therefore there is constant strife, war and enmity all over the world.



Each demoniac person thinks that he can live at the sacrifice of all
others. Generally, a demoniac person thinks of himself as the Supreme
God, and a demoniac preacher tells his followers: "Why are you seeking
God elsewhere? You are all yourselves God! Whatever you like, you can
do. Don't believe in God. Throw away God. God is dead." These are the
demoniac's preachings.
Although the demoniac person sees others equally rich and influential,
or even more so, he thinks that no one is richer than he and that no
one is more influential than he. As far as promotion to the higher
planetary system is concerned, he does not believe in performing yajnas
or sacrifices. Demons think that they will manufacture their own
process of yajna and prepare some machine, by which they will be able
to reach any higher planet. The best example of such a demoniac man was
Ravana. He offered a program to the people by which he would prepare a
staircase so that anyone could reach the heavenly planets without
performing sacrifices, such as are prescribed in the Vedas. Similarly,
in the present age such demoniac men are striving to reach the higher
planetary systems by mechanical arrangements. These are examples of
bewilderment. The result is that, without their knowledge, they are
gliding toward hell. Here the Sanskrit word moha-jala is very
significant. Jala means net; like fish caught in a net, they have no
way to come out.

TEXT 17

atma-sambhavitah stabdha
dhana-mana-madanvitah
yajante nama-yajnais te
dambhenavidhi-purvakam

SYNONYMS

atma-sambhavitah--self-complacent; stabdhah--impudent; dhana-mana--
wealth and false prestige; mada anvitah--absorbed in pride; yajante--
perform sacrifices; nama--in name only; yajnaih--with such a sacrifice;
te--they; dambhena--out of pride; avidhi-purvakam--without following
any rules and regulations.

TRANSLATION

Self-complacent and always impudent, deluded by wealth and false
prestige, they sometimes perform sacrifices in name only, without
following any rules or regulations.

PURPORT

Thinking themselves all in all, not caring for any authority or
scripture, the demoniac sometimes perform so-called religious or
sacrificial rites. And since they do not believe in authority, they are
very impudent. This is due to illusion caused by accumulating some
wealth and false prestige. Sometimes such demons take up the role of
preacher, mislead the people, and become known as religious reformers
or as incarnations of God. They make a show of performing sacrifices,
or they worship the demigods, or manufacture their own God. Common men
advertise them as God and worship them, and by the foolish they are
considered advanced in the principles of religion, or in the principles
of spiritual knowledge. They take the dress of the renounced order of
life and engage in all nonsense in that dress. Actually there are so



many restrictions for one who has renounced this world. The demons,
however, do not care for such restrictions. They think that whatever
path one can create is one's own path; there is no such thing as a
standard path one has to follow. The word avidhi-purvakam, meaning a
disregard for the rules and regulations, is especially stressed here.
These things are always due to ignorance and illusion.

TEXT 18

ahankaram balam darpam
kamam krodham ca samsritah
mam atma-para-dehesu
pradvisanto 'bhyasuyakah

SYNONYMS

ahankaram--false ego; balam--strength; darpam--pride; kamam--lust;
krodham--anger; ca--also; samsritah--having taken shelter of; mam--Me;
atma--one's own; para dehesu--in other bodies; pradvisantah--
blasphemes; abhyasuyakah--envious.

TRANSLATION

Bewildered by false ego, strength, pride, lust and anger, the demon
becomes envious of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is situated
in his own body and in the bodies of others, and blaspheme against the
real religion.

PURPORT

A demoniac person, being always against God's supremacy, does not like
to believe in the scriptures. He is envious of both the scriptures and
of the existence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is caused
by his so-called prestige and his accumulation of wealth and strength.
He does not know that the present life is a preparation for the next
life. Not knowing this, he is actually envious of his own self, as well
as of others. He commits violence on other bodies and on his own. He
does not care for the supreme control of the Personality of Godhead
because he has no knowledge. Being envious of the scriptures and the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, he puts forward false arguments against
the existence of God and refutes the scriptural authority. He thinks
himself independent and powerful in every action. He thinks that since
no one can equal him in strength, power, or in wealth, he can act in
any way and no one can stop him. If he has an enemy who might check the
advancement of his sensual activities, he makes plans to cut him down
by his own power.

TEXT 19

tan aham dvisatah kruran
samsaresu naradhaman
ksipamy ajasram asubhan
asurisv eva yonisu

SYNONYMS

tan--those; aham--I; dvisatah--envious; kruran--mischievous; samsaresu-
-into the ocean of material existence; nara-adhaman--the lowest of



mankind; ksipami--put; ajasram--innumerable; asubhan--inauspicious;
asurisu--demoniac; eva--certainly; yonisu--in the wombs.

TRANSLATION

Those who are envious and mischievous, who are the lowest among men,
are cast by Me into the ocean of material existence, into various
demoniac species of life.

PURPORT

In this verse it is clearly indicated that the placing of a particular
individual soul in a particular body is the prerogative of the supreme
will. The demoniac person may not agree to accept the supremacy of the
Lord, and it is a fact that he may act according to his own whims, but
his next birth will depend upon the decision of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead and not on himself. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam, Third Canto,
it is stated that an individual soul, after his death, is put into the
womb of a mother where he gets a particular type of body under the
supervision of superior power. Therefore in the material existence we
find so many species of life--animals, insects, men, and so on. All are
arranged by the superior power. They are not accidental. As for the
demoniac, it is clearly said here that they are perpetually put into
the wombs of demons, and thus they continue to be envious, the lowest
of mankind. Such demoniac species of men are held to be always full of
lust, always violent and hateful and always unclean. They are just like
so many beasts in a jungle.

TEXT 20

asurim yonim apanna
mudha janmani janmani
mam aprapyaiva kaunteya
tato yanty adhamam gatim

SYNONYMS

asurim--demoniac; yonim--species; apannah--gaining; mudhah--the
foolish; janmani janmani--in birth after birth; mam--unto Me; aprapya--
without achieving; eva--certainly; kaunteya--O son of Kunti; tatah--
thereafter; yanti--goes; adhamam--condemned; gatim--destination.

TRANSLATION

Attaining repeated birth amongst the species of demoniac life, such
persons can never approach Me. Gradually they sink down to the most
abominable type of existence.

PURPORT

It is known that God is all-merciful, but here we find that God is
never merciful to the demoniac. It is clearly stated that the demoniac
people, life after life, are put into the wombs of similar demons, and,
not achieving the mercy of the Supreme Lord, they go down and down, so
that at last they achieve bodies like those of cats, dogs and hogs. It
is clearly stated that such demons have practically no chance of
receiving the mercy of God at any stage of later life. In the Vedas
also it is stated that such persons gradually sink to become dogs and



hogs. It may be then argued in this connection that God should not be
advertised as all-merciful if He is not merciful to such demons. In
answer to this question, in the Vedanta-sutra we find that the Supreme
Lord has no hatred for anyone. The placing of the asuras, the demons,
in the lowest status of life is simply another feature of His mercy.
Sometimes the asuras are killed by the Supreme Lord, but this killing
is also good for them, for in Vedic literature we find that anyone who
is killed by the Supreme Lord becomes liberated. There are instances in
history of many asuras--Ravana, Kamsa, Hiranyakasipu--to whom the Lord
appeared in various incarnations just to kill them. Therefore God's
mercy is shown to the asuras if they are fortunate enough to be killed
by Him.

TEXT 21

tri-vidham narakasyedam
dvaram nasanam atmanah
kamah krodhas tatha lobhas
tasmad etat trayam tyajet

SYNONYMS

tri-vidham--three kinds of; narakasya--hellish; idam--this; dvaram--
gate; nasanam--destructive; atmanah--of the self; kamah--lust; krodhah-
-anger; tatha--as well as; lobhah--greed; tasmat--therefore; etat--
these; trayam--three; tyajet--must give up.

TRANSLATION

There are three gates leading to this hell--lust, anger and greed.
Every sane man should give these up, for they lead to the degradation
of the soul.

PURPORT

The beginning of demoniac life is described herein. One tries to
satisfy his lust, and when he cannot, anger and greed arise. A sane man
who does not want to glide down to the species of demoniac life must
try to give up these three enemies which can kill the self to such an
extent that there will be no possibility of liberation from this
material entanglement.

TEXT 22

etair vimuktah kaunteya
tamo-dvarais tribhir narah
acaraty atmanah sreyas
tato yati param gatim

SYNONYMS

etaih--by these; vimuktah--being liberated; kaunteya--O son of Kunti;
tamah-dvaraih--the gates of ignorance; tribhih--three kinds of; narah--
a person; acarati--performs; atmanah--self; sreyah--benediction; tatah-
-thereafter; yati--goes; param--supreme; gatim--destination.

TRANSLATION



The man who has escaped these three gates of hell, O son of Kunti,
performs acts conducive to self-realization and thus gradually attains
the supreme destination.

PURPORT

One should be very careful of these three enemies to human life: lust,
anger and greed. The more a person is freed from lust, anger and greed,
the more his existence becomes pure. Then he can follow the rules and
regulations enjoined in the Vedic literature. By following the
regulative principles of human life, one gradually raises himself to
the platform of spiritual realization. If one is so fortunate, by such
practice, to rise to the platform of Krsna consciousness, then success
is guaranteed for him. In the Vedic literature, the ways of action and
reaction are prescribed to enable one to come to the stage of
purification. The whole method is based on giving up lust, greed and
anger. By cultivating knowledge of this process, one can be elevated to
the highest position of self-realization; this self-realization is
perfected in devotional service. In that devotional service, the
liberation of the conditioned soul is guaranteed. Therefore, according
to the Vedic system, there are instituted the four orders of life and
the four statuses of life, called the caste system and the spiritual
order system. There are different rules and regulations for different
castes or divisions of society, and if a person is able to follow them,
he will be automatically raised to the highest platform of spiritual
realization. Then he can have liberation without a doubt.

TEXT 23

yah sastra-vidhim utsrjya
vartate kama-karatah
na sa siddhim avapnoti
na sukham na param gatim

SYNONYMS

yah--anyone; sastra-vidhim--the regulations of the scriptures; utsrjya-
-giving up; vartate--remains; kama-karatah--acting whimsically in lust;
na--never; sah--he; siddhim--perfection; avapnoti--achieves; na--never;
sukham--happiness; na--never; param--the supreme; gatim--perfectional
stage.

TRANSLATION

But he who discards scriptural injunctions and acts according to his
own whims attains neither perfection, nor happiness, nor the supreme
destination.

PURPORT

As described before, the sastra-vidhi, or the direction of the sastra,
is given to the different castes and orders of human society. Everyone
is expected to follow these rules and regulations. If one does not
follow them and acts whimsically according to his lust, greed and
desire, then he never will be perfect in his life. In other words, a
man may theoretically know all these things, but if he does not apply
them in his own life, then he is to be known as the lowest of mankind.
In the human form of life, a living entity is expected to be sane and



to follow the regulations given for elevating his life to the highest
platform, but if he does not follow them, then he degrades himself. But
even if he follows the rules and regulations and moral principles and
ultimately does not come to the stage of understanding the Supreme
Lord, then all his knowledge becomes spoiled. Therefore one should
gradually raise himself to the platform of Krsna consciousness and
devotional service; it is then and there that he can attain the highest
perfectional stage, not otherwise.
The word kama-karatah is very significant. A person who knowingly
violates the rules acts in lust. He knows that this is forbidden, still
he acts. This is called acting whimsically. He knows that this should
be done, but still he does not do it; therefore he is called whimsical.
Such persons are destined to be condemned by the Supreme Lord. Such
persons cannot have the perfection which is meant for the human life.
The human life is especially meant for purifying one's existence, and
one who does not follow the rules and regulations cannot purify
himself, nor can he attain the real stage of happiness.

TEXT 24

tasmac chastram pramanam te
karyakarya-vyavasthitau
jnatva sastra-vidhanoktam
karma kartum iharhasi

SYNONYMS

tasmat--therefore; sastram--scriptures; pramanam--evidence; te--your;
karya--duty; akarya--forbidden activities; vyavasthitau--in
determining; jnatva--knowing; sastra--of scripture; vidhana--
regulations; uktam--as declared; karma--work; kartum--to do; iha
arhasi--you should do it.

TRANSLATION

One should understand what is duty and what is not duty by the
regulations of the scriptures. Knowing such rules and regulations, one
should act so that he may gradually be elevated.

PURPORT

As stated in the Fifteenth Chapter, all the rules and regulations of
the Vedas are meant for knowing Krsna. If one understands Krsna from
the Bhagavad-gita and becomes situated in Krsna consciousness, engaging
himself in devotional service, he has reached the highest perfection of
knowledge offered by the Vedic literature. Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu
made this process very easy: He asked people simply to chant Hare
Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama
Rama, Hare Hare and to engage in the devotional service of the Lord and
eat the remnants of foodstuff offered to the Deity. One who is directly
engaged in all these devotional activities is to be understood as
having studied all Vedic literature. He has come to the conclusion
perfectly. Of course, for the ordinary persons who are not in Krsna
consciousness or who are not engaged in devotional service, what is to
be done and what is not to be done must be decided by the injunctions
of the Vedas. One should act accordingly, without argument. That is
called following the principles of sastra, or scripture. Sastra is
without the four principal defects that are visible in the conditioned



soul: imperfect senses, the propensity for cheating, certainty of
committing mistakes, and certainty of being illusioned. These four
principal defects in conditioned life disqualify one from putting forth
rules and regulations. Therefore, the rules and regulations as
described in the sastra--being above these defects--are accepted
without alteration by all great saints, acaryas and great souls.
In India there are many parties of spiritual understanding, generally
classified as two: the impersonalist and the personalist. Both of them,
however, lead their lives according to the principles of the Vedas.
Without following the principles of the scriptures, one cannot elevate
himself to the perfectional stage. One who actually, therefore,
understands the purport of the sastras is considered fortunate.
In human society, aversion to the principles of understanding the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is the cause of all falldowns. That is
the greatest offense of human life. Therefore, maya, the material
energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is always giving us
trouble in the shape of the threefold miseries. This material energy is
constituted of the three modes of material nature. One has to raise
himself at least to the mode of goodness before the path to
understanding the Supreme Lord can be opened. Without raising oneself
to the standard of the mode of goodness, one remains in ignorance and
passion, which are the cause of demoniac life. Those in the modes of
passion and ignorance deride the scriptures, deride the holy man, and
deride the proper understanding of the spiritual master, and they do
not care for the regulations of the scriptures. In spite of hearing the
glories of devotional service, they are not attracted. Thus they
manufacture their own way of elevation. These are some of the defects
of human society, which lead to the demoniac status of life. If,
however, one is able to be guided by a proper and bona fide spiritual
master, who can lead one to the path of elevation, to the higher stage,
then one's life becomes successful.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Sixteenth Chapter of the
Srimad Bhagavad-gita in the matter of the Divine and Demoniac Natures.

Chapter 17
The Divisions of Faith

TEXT 1

arjuna uvaca
ye sastra-vidhim utsrjya
yajante sraddhayanvitah
tesam nistha tu ka krsna
sattvam aho rajas tamah

SYNONYMS

arjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; ye--those; sastra-vidhim--the regulations
of scripture; utsrjya--giving up; yajante--worship; sraddhaya--full
faith; anvitah--possessed of; tesam--of them; nistha--faith; tu--but;
ka--what is that; krsna--O Krsna; sattvam--in goodness; aho--said;
rajah--in passion; tamah--in ignorance.

TRANSLATION



Arjuna said, O Krsna, what is the situation of one who do not follow
the principles of scripture but who worships according to his own
imagination? Is he in goodness, in passion or in ignorance?

PURPORT

In the Fourth Chapter, thirty-ninth verse, it is said that a person
faithful to a particular type of worship gradually becomes elevated to
the stage of knowledge and attains the highest perfectional stage of
peace and prosperity. In the Sixteenth Chapter, it is concluded that
one who does not follow the principles laid down in the scriptures is
called an asura, demon, and one who follows the scriptural injunctions
faithfully is called a deva, or demigod. Now, if one, with faith,
follows some rules which are not mentioned in the scriptural
injunctions, what is his position? This doubt of Arjuna's is to be
cleared by Krsna. Are those who create some sort of God by selecting a
human being and placing their faith in him worshiping in goodness,
passion or ignorance? Do such persons attain the perfectional stage of
life? Is it possible for them to be situated in real knowledge and
elevate themselves to the highest perfectional stage? Do those who do
not follow the rules and regulations of the scriptures but who have
faith in something and worship gods and demigods and men attain success
in their effort? Arjuna is putting these questions to Krsna.

TEXT 2

sri-bhagavan uvaca
tri-vidha bhavati sraddha
dehinam sa svabhava-ja
sattviki rajasi caiva
tamasi ceti tam srnu

SYNONYMS

sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; tri-vidha-
-three kinds; bhavati--become; sraddha--faith; dehinam--of the
embodied; sa--that; sva-bhava-ja--according to his mode of material
nature; sattviki--mode of goodness; rajasi--mode of passion; ca--also;
eva--certainly; tamasi--mode of ignorance; ca--and; iti--thus; tam--
that; srnu--hear from Me.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Lord said, according to the modes of nature acquired by the
embodied soul, one's faith can be of three kinds--goodness, passion or
ignorance. Now hear about these.

PURPORT

Those who know the rules and regulations of the scriptures, but, out of
laziness or indolence, give up following these rules and regulations
are governed by the modes of material nature. According to their
previous activities in the modes of goodness, passion or ignorance,
they acquire a nature which is of a specific quality. The association
of the living entity with the different modes of nature has been going
on perpetually since the living entity is in contact with material
nature. Thus he acquires different types of mentality according to his
association with the material modes. But this nature can be changed if



one associates with a bona fide spiritual master and abides by his
rules and the scriptures. Gradually, one can change his position from
ignorance to goodness, or from passion to goodness. The conclusion is
that blind faith in a particular mode of nature cannot help a person
become elevated to the perfectional stage. One has to consider things
carefully, with intelligence, in the association of a bona fide
spiritual master. Thus one can change his position to a higher mode of
nature.

TEXT 3

sattvanurupa sarvasya
sraddha bhavati bharata
sraddha-mayo 'yam puruso
yo yac-chraddhah sa eva sah

SYNONYMS

sattva-anurupa--according to the existence; sarvasya--of everyone;
sraddha--faith; bhavati--becomes; bharata--O son of Bharata; sraddha--
faith; mayah--full; ayam--this; purusah--living entity; yah--anyone;
yat--that; sraddhah--faith; sah--that; eva--certainly; sah--he.

TRANSLATION

According to one's existence under the various modes of nature, one
evolves a particular kind of faith. The living being is said to be of a
particular faith according to the modes he has acquired.

PURPORT

Everyone has a particular type of faith, regardless of what he is. But
his faith is considered good, passionate or ignorant according to the
nature he has acquired. Thus, according to his particular type of
faith, one associates with certain persons. Now the real fact is that
every living being, as is stated in the Fifteenth Chapter, is
originally the fragmental part and parcel of the Supreme Lord.
Therefore one is originally transcendental to all the modes of material
nature. But when one forgets his relationship with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and comes into contact with the material nature
in conditional life, he generates his own position by association with
the different varieties of material nature. The resultant artificial
faith and existence are only material. Although one may be conducted by
some impression, or some conception of life, still, originally, he is
nirguna, or transcendental. Therefore one has to become cleansed of the
material contamination that he has acquired in order to regain his
relationship with the Supreme Lord. That is the only path back without
fear: Krsna consciousness. If one is situated in Krsna consciousness,
then that path is guaranteed for his elevation to the perfectional
stage. If one does not take to this path of self-realization, then he
is surely to be conducted by the influence of the modes of nature.
The word sraddha, or faith, is very significant in this verse. Sraddha
or faith always comes out of the works of goodness. One's faith may be
in a demigod or some created God or some mental concoction. It is
supposed to be one's strong faith in something that is productive of
the works of material goodness. But in material conditional life, no
works of material nature are completely purified. They are mixed. They
are not in pure goodness. Pure goodness is transcendental; in pure



goodness one can understand the real nature of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. As long as one's faith is not completely in purified
goodness, the faith is subject to contamination by any of the modes of
material nature. The contaminated modes of material nature expand to
the heart. Therefore according to the position of the heart in contact
with a particular mode of material nature, one's faith is established.
It should be understood, that if one's heart is in the mode of
goodness, his faith is also in the mode of goodness. If his heart is in
the mode of passion, his faith is also in the mode of passion. And if
his heart is in the mode of darkness, illusion, his faith is also thus
contaminated. Thus we find different types of faith in this world, and
there are different types of religions due to different types of faith.
The real principle of religious faith is situated in the mode of pure
goodness, but because the heart is tainted, we find different types of
religious principles. Thus according to different types of faith, there
are different kinds of worship.

TEXT 4

yajante sattvika devan
yaksa-raksamsi rajasah
pretan bhuta-ganams canye
yajante tamasa janah

SYNONYMS

yajante--worship; sattvikah--those who are in the mode of goodness;
devan--demigods; yaksa-raksamsi rajasah--those who are in the mode of
passion worship demons; pretan--dead spirits; bhuta-ganan--ghosts; ca
anye--and others; yajante--worship; tamasah--in the mode of ignorance;
janah--people.

TRANSLATION

Men in the mode of goodness worship the demigods; those in the mode of
passion worship the demons and those in the mode of ignorance worship
ghosts and spirits.

PURPORT

In this verse the Supreme Personality of Godhead describes different
kinds of worshipers according to their external activities. According
to scriptural injunction only the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
worshipable, but those who are not very conversant with, or faithful
to, the scriptural injunctions worship different objects, according to
their specific situations in the modes of material nature. Those who
are situated in goodness generally worship the demigods. The demigods
include Brahma, Siva and others such as Indra, Candra and the sun-god.
There are various demigods. Those in goodness worship a particular
demigod for a particular purpose. Similarly, those who are in the mode
of passion worship the demons. We recall that during the Second World
War, a man in Calcutta worshiped Hitler because thanks to that war he
had amassed a large amount of wealth by dealing in the black market.
Similarly, those in the modes of passion and ignorance generally select
a powerful man to be God. They think that anyone can be worshiped as
God and that the same results will be obtained.
Now, it is clearly described here that those who are in the mode of
passion worship and create such gods, and those who are in the mode of



ignorance, in darkness, worship dead spirits. Sometimes people worship
at the tomb of some dead man. Sexual service is also considered to be
in the mode of darkness. Similarly, in remote villages in India there
are worshipers of ghosts. We have seen that in India the lower-class
people sometimes go to the forest, and if they have knowledge that a
ghost lives in a tree, they worship that tree and offer sacrifices.
These different kinds of worship are not actually God worship. God
worship is for persons who are transcendentally situated in pure
goodness. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam (4.3.23) it is said, sattvam
visuddham vasudeva-sabditam: "When a man is situated in pure goodness,
he worships Vasudeva." The purport is that those who are completely
purified of the material modes of nature and who are transcendentally
situated can worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
The impersonalists are supposed to be situated in the mode of goodness,
and they worship five kinds of demigods. They worship the impersonal
Visnu, or the Visnu form in the material world, which is known as
philosophized Visnu. Visnu is the expansion of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, but the impersonalists, because they do not ultimately
believe in the Supreme Personality of Godhead, imagine that the Visnu
form is just another aspect of the impersonal Brahman; similarly, they
imagine that Lord Brahma is the impersonal form in the material mode of
passion. Thus they sometimes describe five kinds of gods that are
worshipable, but because they think that the actual truth is impersonal
Brahman, they dispose of all worshipable objects at the ultimate end.
In conclusion, the different qualities of the material modes of nature
can be purified through association with persons who are of
transcendental nature.

TEXTS 5-6

asastra-vihitam ghoram
tapyante ye tapo janah
dambhahankara-samyuktah
kama-raga-balanvitah

karsayantah sarira-stham
bhuta-gramam acetasah
mam caivantah sarira-stham
tan viddhy asura-niscayan

SYNONYMS

asastra--not mentioned in the scriptures; vihitam--directed; ghoram--
harmful to others; tapyante--undergo penances; ye--those; tapah--
austerities; janah--persons; dambha--pride; ahankara--egoism;
samyuktah--engaged; kama--lust; raga--attachment; bala--force; anvitah-
-impelled by; karsayantah--tormenting; sarira-stham--situated within
the body; bhuta-gramam--combination of material elements; acetasah--by
such a misled mentality; mam--to Me; ca--also; eva--certainly; antah--
within; sarira-stham--situated in the body; tan--them; viddhi--
understand; asura--demons; niscayan--certainly.

TRANSLATION

Those who undergo severe austerities and penances not recommended in
the scriptures, performing them out of pride, egoism, lust and
attachment, who are impelled by passion and who torture their bodily



organs as well as the Supersoul dwelling within are to be known as
demons.

PURPORT

There are persons who manufacture modes of austerity and penances which
are not mentioned in the scriptural injunctions. For instance, fasting
for some ulterior purpose, such as to promote a purely political end is
not mentioned in the scriptural directions. The scriptures recommend
fasting for spiritual advancement, not for some political end or social
purpose. Persons who take to such austerities are, according to
Bhagavad-gita, certainly demoniac. Their acts are against the
scriptural injunctions and are not beneficial for the people in
general. Actually, they act out of pride, false ego, lust and
attachment for material enjoyment. By such activities, not only is the
combination of material elements of which the body is constructed
disturbed, but also the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself living
within the body. Such unauthorized fasting or austerities for some
political end are certainly very disturbing to others. They are not
mentioned in the Vedic literature. A demoniac person may think that he
can force his enemy or other parties to comply with his desire by this
method, but sometimes one dies by such fasting. These acts are not
approved by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and He says that those
who engage in them are demons. Such demonstrations are insults to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead because they are enacted in disobedience
to the Vedic scriptural injunctions. The word acetasah is significant
in this connection. Persons of normal mental condition must obey the
scriptural injunctions. Those who are not in such a position neglect
and disobey the scriptures and manufacture their own way of austerities
and penances. One should always remember the ultimate end of the
demoniac people, as described in the previous chapter. The Lord forces
them to take birth in the wombs of demoniac persons. Consequently they
will live by demoniac principles life after life without knowing their
relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If, however, such
persons are fortunate enough to be guided by a spiritual master who can
direct them to the path of Vedic wisdom, they can get out of this
entanglement and ultimately achieve the supreme goal.

TEXT 7

aharas tv api sarvasya
tri-vidho bhavati priyah
yajnas tapas tatha danam
tesam bhedam imam srnu

SYNONYMS

aharah--eating; tu--certainly; api--also; sarvasya--of everyone; tri-
vidhah--three kinds; bhavati--there are; priyah--dear; yajnah--
sacrifice; tapah--austerity; tatha--also; danam--charity; tesam--of
them; bhedam--differences; imam--thus; srnu--hear.

TRANSLATION

Even food of which all partake is of three kinds, according to the
three modes of material nature. The same is true of sacrifices,
austerities and charity. Listen, and I shall tell you of the
distinctions of these.



PURPORT

In terms of different situations in the modes of material nature, there
are differences in the manner of eating, performing sacrifices,
austerities and charities. They are not all conducted on the same
level. Those who can understand analytically what kind of performances
are in what modes of material nature are actually wise; those who
consider all kinds of sacrifice or foods or charity to be the same
cannot discriminate, and they are foolish. There are missionary workers
who advocate that one can do whatever he likes and attain perfection.
But these foolish guides are not acting according to the direction of
the scripture. They are manufacturing ways and misleading the people in
general.

TEXT 8-10

ayuh-sattva-balarogya-
sukha-priti-vivardhanah
rasyah snigdhah sthira hrdya
aharah sattvika-priyah

katv-amla-lavanaty-usna-
tiksna-ruksa-vidahinah
ahara rajasasyesta
duhkha-sokamaya-pradah

yata-yamam gata-rasam
puti paryusitam ca yat
ucchistam api camedhyam
bhojanam tamasa-priyam

SYNONYMS

ayuh--duration of life; sattva--existence; bala--strength; arogya--
health; sukha--happiness; priti--satisfaction; vivardhanah--increasing;
rasyah--juicy; snigdhah--fatty; sthirah--enduring; hrdyah--pleasing to
the heart; aharah--food; sattvika--goodness; priyah--palatable. katu--
bitter; amla--sour; lavana--salty; ati-usna--very hot; tiksna--pungent;
ruksa--dry; vidahinah--burning; aharah--food; rajasasya--in the mode of
passion; istah--palatable; duhkha--distress; soka--misery; amaya
pradah--causing disease. yata-yamam--food cooked three hours before
being eaten; gata-rasam--tasteless; puti--bad smelling; paryusitam--
decomposed; ca--also; yat--that which; ucchistam--remnants of food
eaten by others; api--also; ca--and; amedhyam--untouchable; bhojanam--
eating; tamasa--in the mode of darkness; priyam--dear.

TRANSLATION

Foods in the mode of goodness increase the duration of life, purify
one's existence and give strength, health, happiness and satisfaction.
Such nourishing foods are sweet, juicy, fatty and palatable. Foods that
are too bitter, too sour, salty, pungent, dry and hot, are liked by
people in the mode of passion. Such foods cause pain, distress, and
disease. Food cooked more than three hours before being eaten, which is
tasteless, stale, putrid, decomposed and unclean, is food liked by
people in the mode of ignorance.



PURPORT

The purpose of food is to increase the duration of life, purify the
mind and aid bodily strength. This is its only purpose. In the past,
great authorities selected those foods that best aid health and
increase life's duration, such as milk products, sugar, rice, wheat,
fruits and vegetables. These foods are very dear to those in the mode
of goodness. Some other foods, such as baked corn and molasses, while
not very palatable in themselves, can be made pleasant when mixed with
milk or other foods. They are then in the mode of goodness. All these
foods are pure by nature. They are quite distinct from untouchable
things like meat and liquor. Fatty foods, as mentioned in the eighth
verse, have no connection with animal fat obtained by slaughter. Animal
fat is available in the form of milk, which is the most wonderful of
all foods. Milk, butter, cheese and similar products give animal fat in
a form which rules out any need for the killing of innocent creatures.
It is only through brute mentality that this killing goes on. The
civilized method of obtaining needed fat is by milk. Slaughter is the
way of subhumans. Protein is amply available through split peas, dal,
whole wheat, etc.
Foods in the mode of passion, which are bitter, too salty, or too hot
or overly mixed with red pepper, cause misery by producing mucus in the
stomach, leading to disease. Foods in the mode of ignorance or darkness
are essentially those that are not fresh. Any food cooked more than
three hours before it is eaten (except prasadam, food offered to the
Lord) is considered to be in the mode of darkness. Because they are
decomposing, such foods give a bad odor, which often attracts people in
this mode but repulses those in the mode of goodness.
Remnants of food may be eaten only when they are part of a meal that
was first offered to the Supreme Lord or first eaten by saintly
persons, especially the spiritual master. Otherwise the remnants of
food are considered to be in the mode of darkness, and they increase
infection or disease. Such foodstuffs, although very palatable to
persons in the mode of darkness, are neither liked nor even touched by
those in the mode of goodness. The best food is the remnants of what is
offered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In Bhagavad-gita the
Supreme Lord says that He accepts preparations of vegetables, flour and
milk when offered with devotion. Patram puspam phalam toyam. Of course,
devotion and love are the chief things which the Supreme Personality of
Godhead accepts. But it is also mentioned that the prasadam should be
prepared in a particular way. Any food prepared by the injunctions of
the scripture and offered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead can be
taken even if prepared long, long ago, because such food is
transcendental. Therefore to make food antiseptic, eatable and
palatable for all persons, one should offer food to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 11

aphalakanksibhir yajno
vidhi-disto ya ijyate
yastavyam eveti manah
samadhaya sa sattvikah

SYNONYMS

aphala-akanksibhih--devoid of desire for result; yajnah--sacrifice;
vidhi--accordingly; distah--direction; yah--anyone; ijyate--performs;



yastavyam--must be performed; eva--certainly; iti--thus; manah--mind;
samadhaya--fixed in; sah--he; sattvikah--is in the mode of goodness.

TRANSLATION

Of sacrifices, that sacrifice performed according to duty and to
scriptural rules, and with no expectation of reward, is of the nature
of goodness.

PURPORT

The general tendency is to offer sacrifice with some purpose in mind,
but here it is stated that sacrifice should be performed without any
such desire. It should be done as a matter of duty. Take, for example,
the performance of rituals in temples or in churches. Generally they
are performed with the purpose of material benefit, but that is not in
the mode of goodness. One should go to a temple or church as a matter
of duty, offer respect to the Supreme Personality of Godhead and offer
flowers and eatables. Everyone thinks that there is no use in going to
the temple just to worship God. But worship for economic benefit is not
recommended in the scriptural injunctions. One should go simply to
offer respect to the Deity. That will place one in the mode of
goodness. It is the duty of every civilized man to obey the injunctions
of the scriptures and offer respect to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.

TEXT 12

abhisandhaya tu phalam
dambhartham api caiva yat
ijyate bharata-srestha
tam yajnam viddhi rajasam

SYNONYMS

abhisandhaya--desiring; tu--but; phalam--the result; dambha--pride;
artham--for the sake of; api--also; ca--and; eva--certainly; yat--that
which; ijyate--worship; bharata-srestha--O chief of the Bharatas; tam--
that; yajnam--sacrifice; viddhi--know; rajasam--in the mode of passion.

TRANSLATION

But that sacrifice performed for some material end or benefit or
preformed ostentatiously, out of pride, is of the nature of passion, O
chief of the Bharatas.

PURPORT

Sometimes sacrifices and rituals are performed for elevation to the
heavenly kingdom or for some material benefits in this world. Such
sacrifices or ritualistic performances are considered to be in the mode
of passion.

TEXT 13

vidhi-hinam asrstannam
mantra-hinam adaksinam
sraddha-virahitam yajnam



tamasam paricaksate

SYNONYMS

vidhi-hinam--without scriptural direction; asrsta-annam--without
distribution of prasadam; mantra-hinam--with no chanting of the Vedic
hymns; adaksinam--with no remunerations to the priests; sraddha--faith;
virahitam--without; yajnam--sacrifice; tamasam--in the mode of
ignorance; paricaksate--is to be considered.

TRANSLATION

And that sacrifice performed in defiance of scriptural injunctions, in
which no spiritual food is distributed, no hymns are chanted and no
remunerations are made to the priests, and which is faithless--that
sacrifice if of the nature of ignorance.

PURPORT

Faith in the mode of darkness or ignorance is actually faithlessness.
Sometimes people worship some demigod just to make money and then spend
the money for recreation, ignoring the scriptural injunctions. Such
ceremonial shows of religiosity are not accepted as genuine. They are
all in the mode of darkness; they produce a demoniac mentality and do
not benefit human society.

TEXT 14

deva-dvija-guru-prajna-
pujanam saucam arjavam
brahmacaryam ahimsa ca
sariram tapa ucyate

SYNONYMS

deva--the Supreme Lord; dvija--the brahmana; guru--the spiritual
master; prajna--worshipable personalities; pujanam--worship; saucam--
cleanliness; arjavam--simplicity; brahmacaryam--celibacy; ahimsa--
nonviolence; ca--also; sariram--pertaining to the body; tapah--
austerity; ucyate--is said to be.

TRANSLATION

The austerity of the body consists of this: worship of the Supreme
Lord, the brahmanas, the spiritual master, and superiors like the
father and mother. Cleanliness, simplicity, celibacy and nonviolence
are also austerities of the body.

PURPORT

The Supreme Godhead here explains the different kinds of austerity and
penance. First He explains the austerities and penances practiced by
the body. One should offer, or learn to offer, respect to God or to the
demigods, the perfect, qualified brahmanas and the spiritual master and
superiors like father, mother or any person who is conversant with
Vedic knowledge. These should be given proper respect. One should
practice cleansing oneself externally and internally, and he should
learn to become simple in behavior. He should not do anything which is



not sanctioned by the scriptural injunctions. He should not indulge in
sex outside of married life, for sex is sanctioned in the scriptures
only in marriage, not otherwise. This is called celibacy. These are
penances and austerities as far as the body is concerned.

TEXT 15

anudvega-karam vakyam
satyam priya-hitam ca yat
svadhyayabhyasanam caiva
van-mayam tapa ucyate

SYNONYMS

anudvega--not agitating; karam--producing; vakyam--words; satyam--
truthful; priya--dear; hitam--beneficial; ca--also; yat--which;
svadhyaya--Vedic study; abhyasanam--practice; ca--also; eva--certainly;
van-mayam--of the voice; tapah--austerity; ucyate--is said to be.

TRANSLATION

Austerity of speech consists in speaking truthfully and beneficially
and in avoiding speech that offends. One should also recite the Vedas
regularly.

PURPORT

One should not speak in such a way as to agitate the minds of others.
Of course, when a teacher speaks, he can speak the truth for the
instruction of his students, but such a teacher should not speak to
others who are not his students if he will agitate their minds. This is
penance as far as talking is concerned. Besides that, one should not
talk nonsense. When speaking in spiritual circles, one's statements
must be upheld by the scriptures. One should at once quote from
scriptural authority to back up what he is saying. At the same time,
such talk should be very pleasurable to the ear. By such discussions,
one may derive the highest benefit and elevate human society. There is
a limitless stock of Vedic literature, and one should study this. This
is called penance of speech.

TEXT 16

manah-prasadah saumyatvam
maunam atma-vinigrahah
bhava-samsuddhir ity etat
tapo manasam ucyate

SYNONYMS

manah-prasadah--satisfaction of the mind; saumyatvam--without duplicity
towards others; maunam--gravity; atma--self; vinigrahah--control;
bhava--nature; samsuddhih--purification; iti--thus; etat--that is;
tapah--austerity; manasam--of the mind; ucyate--is said to be.

TRANSLATION

And satisfaction, simplicity, gravity, self-control and purity of
thought are the austerities of the mind.



PURPORT

To make the mind austere is to detach it from sense gratification. It
should be so trained that it can be always thinking of doing good for
others. The best training for the mind is gravity in thought. One
should not deviate from Krsna consciousness and must always avoid sense
gratification. To purify one's nature is to become Krsna conscious.
Satisfaction of the mind can be obtained only by taking the mind away
from thoughts of sense enjoyment. The more we think of sense enjoyment,
the more the mind becomes dissatisfied. In the present age we
unnecessarily engage the mind in so many different ways for sense
gratification, and so there is no possibility of the mind's becoming
satisfied. The best course is to divert the mind to the Vedic
literature, which is full of satisfying stories, as in the Puranas and
the Mahabharata. One can take advantage of this knowledge and thus
become purified. The mind should be devoid of duplicity, and one should
think of the welfare of all. Silence means that one is always thinking
of self-realization. The person in Krsna consciousness observes perfect
silence in this sense. Control of the mind means detaching the mind
from sense enjoyment. One should be straightforward in his dealings and
thereby purify his existence. All these qualities together constitute
austerity in mental activities.

TEXT 17

sraddhaya paraya taptam
tapas tat tri-vidham naraih
aphalakanksibhir yuktaih
sattvikam paricaksate

SYNONYMS

sraddhaya--with faith; paraya--transcendental; taptam--execution;
tapah--austerity; tat--that; tri-vidham--three kinds; naraih--by men;
aphala-akanksibhih--without desires for fruits; yuktaih--engaged;
sattvikam--in the mode of goodness; paricaksate--is called.

TRANSLATION

This threefold austerity, practiced by men whose aim is not to benefit
themselves materially but to please the Supreme, is of the nature of
goodness.

TEXT 18

satkara-mana-pujartham
tapo dambhena caiva yat
kriyate tad iha proktam
rajasam calam adhruvam

SYNONYMS

sat-kara--respect; mana--honor; puja-artham--for worship; tapah--
austerity; dambhena--pride; ca--also; eva--certainly; yat--which is;
kriyate--performed; tat--that; iha--in this world; proktam--is said;
rajasam--in the mode of passion; calam--flickering; adhruvam--
temporary.



TRANSLATION

Those ostentatious penances and austerities which are performed in
order to gain respect, honor and worship are said to be in the mode of
passion. They are neither stable nor permanent.

PURPORT

Sometimes penance and austerity are executed to attract people and
receive honor, respect and worship from others. Persons in the mode of
passion arrange to be worshiped by subordinates and let them wash their
feet and offer riches. Such arrangements artificially made by the
performance of penances are considered to be in the mode of passion.
The results are temporary; they can be continued for some time, but
they are not permanent.

TEXT 19

mudha-grahenatmano yat
pidaya kriyate tapah
parasyotsadanartham va
tat tamasam udahrtam

SYNONYMS

mudha--foolish; grahena--with endeavor; atmanah--of one's own self;
yat--which; pidaya--by torture; kriyate--is performed; tapah--penance;
parasya--to others; utsadana-artham--causing annihilation; va--or; tat-
-that; tamasam--in the mode of darkness; udahrtam--is said to be.

TRANSLATION

And those penances and austerities which are performed foolishly by
means of obstinate self-torture, or to destroy or injure others, are
said to be in the mode of ignorance.

PURPORT

There are instances of foolish penance undertaken by demons like
Hiranyakasipu, who performed austere penances to become immortal and
kill the demigods. He prayed to Brahma for such things, but ultimately
he was killed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. To undergo
penances for something which is impossible is certainly in the mode of
ignorance.

TEXT 20

datavyam iti yad danam
diyate 'nupakarine
dese kale ca patre ca
tad danam sattvikam smrtam

SYNONYMS

datavyam--worth giving; iti--thus; yat--that which; danam--charity;
diyate--given; anupakarine--to any person irrespective of doing good;
dese--in place; kale--in time; ca--also; patre--suitable person; ca--



and; tat--that; danam--charity; sattvikam--in the mode of goodness;
smrtam--consider.

TRANSLATION

That gift which is given out of duty, at the proper time and place, to
a worthy person, and without expectation of return, is considered to be
charity in the mode of goodness.

PURPORT

In the Vedic literature, charity given to a person engaged in spiritual
activities is recommended. There is no recommendation for giving
charity indiscriminately. Spiritual perfection is always a
consideration. Therefore charity is recommended to be given at a place
of pilgrimage and at lunar or solar eclipses or at the end of the month
or to a qualified brahmana or a Vaisnava (devotee) or in temples. Such
charities should be given without any consideration of return. Charity
to the poor is sometimes given out of compassion, but if a poor man is
not worth giving charity to, then there is no spiritual advancement. In
other words, indiscriminate charity is not recommended in the Vedic
literature.

TEXT 21

yat tu pratyupakarartham
phalam uddisya va punah
diyate ca pariklistam
tad danam rajasam smrtam

SYNONYMS

yat--that which; tu--but; prati-upakara-artham--for the sake of getting
some return; phalam--result; uddisya--desiring; va--or; punah--again;
diyate--is given in charity; ca--also; pariklistam--grudgingly; tat--
that; danam--charity; rajasam--in the mode of passion; smrtam--is
understood to be.

TRANSLATION

But charity performed with the expectation of some return, or with a
desire for fruitive results, or in a grudging mood, is said to be
charity in the mode of passion.

PURPORT

Charity is sometimes performed for elevation to the heavenly kingdom
and sometimes with great trouble and with repentance afterwards. "Why
have I spent so much in this way?" Charity is also sometimes given
under some obligation, at the request of a superior. These kinds of
charity are said to be in the mode of passion.
There are many charitable foundations which offer their gifts to
institutions where sense gratification goes on. Such charities are not
recommended in the Vedic scripture. Only charity in the mode of
goodness is recommended.

TEXT 22



adesa-kale yad danam
apatrebhyas ca diyate
asat-krtam avajnatam
tat tamasam udahrtam

SYNONYMS

adesa--unpurified place; kale--unpurified time; yat--that which; danam-
-charity; upatrebhyah--to unworthy persons; ca--also; diyate--is given;
asat-krtam--without respect; avajnatam--without proper attention; tat--
that; tamasam--in the mode of darkness; udahrtam--is said to be.

TRANSLATION

And charity performed at an improper place and time and given to
unworthy persons without respect and with contempt is charity in the
mode of ignorance.

PURPORT

Contributions for indulgence in intoxication and gambling are not
encouraged here. That sort of contribution is in the mode of ignorance.
Such charity is not beneficial; rather, sinful persons are encouraged.
Similarly, if a person gives charity to a suitable person without
respect and without attention, that sort of charity is also said to be
in the mode of darkness.

TEXT 23

om tat sad iti nirdeso
brahmanas tri-vidhah smrtah
brahmanas tena vedas ca
yajnas ca vihitah pura

SYNONYMS

om--indication of the Supreme; tat--that; sat--eternal; iti--that;
nirdesah--indication; brahmanah--of the Supreme; tri-vidhah--three
kinds; smrtah--consider; brahmanah--the brahmanas; tena--therefore;
vedah--the Vedic literature; ca--also; yajnah--sacrifice; ca--also;
vihitah--used; pura--formerly.

TRANSLATION

From the beginning of creation, the three syllables--om tat sat--have
been used to indicate the Supreme Absolute Truth [Brahman]. They were
uttered by brahmanas while chanting Vedic hymns and during sacrifices,
for the satisfaction of the Supreme.

PURPORT

It has been explained that penance, sacrifice, charity and foods are
divided into three categories: the modes of goodness, passion and
ignorance. But whether first class, second class or third class, they
are all conditioned, contaminated by the material modes of nature. When
they are aimed at the Supreme--om tat sat, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the eternal--they become means for spiritual elevation. In the
scriptural injunctions such an objective is indicated. These three



words, om tat sat, particularly indicate the Absolute Truth, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. In the Vedic hymns, the word om is
always found.
One who acts without following the regulations of the scriptures will
not attain the Absolute Truth. He will get some temporary result, but
not the ultimate end of life. The conclusion is that the performance of
charity, sacrifice and penance must be done in the mode of goodness.
Performed in the mode of passion and ignorance, they are certainly
inferior in quality. The three words om tat sat are uttered in
conjunction with the holy name of the Supreme Lord, e.g., om tad
visnoh. Whenever a Vedic hymn or the holy name of the Supreme Lord is
uttered, om is added. This is the indication of Vedic literature. These
three words are taken from Vedic hymns. Om ity etad brahmano nedistham
nama (Rg Veda) indicates the first goal. Then tat tvam asi (Chandogya
Upanisad 6.8.7) indicates the second goal. And sad eva saumya
(Chandogya Upanisad 6.2.1) indicates the third goal. Combined they
become om tat sat. Formerly when Brahma, the first created living
entity, performed sacrifices, he spoke these three names of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The same principle holds by disciplic
succession. So this hymn has great significance. Bhagavad-gita
recommends, therefore, that any work done should be done for om tat
sat, or for the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When one performs
penance, charity, and sacrifice with these three words, he is acting in
Krsna consciousness. Krsna consciousness is a scientific execution of
transcendental activities which enables one to return home, back to
Godhead. There is no loss of energy in acting in such a transcendental
way.

TEXT 24

tasmad om ity udahrtya
yajna-dana-tapah-kriyah
pravartante vidhanoktah
satatam brahma-vadinam

SYNONYMS

tasmat--therefore; om--beginning with om; iti--thus; udahrtya--
indicating; yajna--sacrifice; dana--charity; tapah--penance; kriyah--
performances; pravartante--begin; vidhana-uktah--according to
scriptural regulation; satatam--always; brahma-vadinam--of the
transcendentalists.

TRANSLATION

Thus the transcendentalists undertake sacrifices, charities, and
penances, beginning always with om, to attain the Supreme.

PURPORT

Om tad visnoh paramam padam (Rg Veda 1.22.20). The lotus feet of Visnu
are the supreme devotional platform. The performance of everything on
behalf of the Supreme Personality of Godhead assures the perfection of
all activity.

TEXT 25

tad ity anabhisandhaya



phalam yajna-tapah-kriyah
dana-kriyas ca vividhah
kriyante moksa-kanksibhih

SYNONYMS

tat--that; iti--they; anabhisandhaya--without fruitive result; phalam--
result of sacrifice; yajna--sacrifice; tapah--penance; kriyah--
activities; dana--charity; kriyah--activities; ca--also; vividhah--
varieties; kriyante--done; moksa-kanksibhih--those who actually desire
liberation.

TRANSLATION

One should perform sacrifice, penance and charity with the word tat.
The purpose of such transcendental activities is to get free from the
material entanglement.

PURPORT

To be elevated to the spiritual position, one should not act for any
material gain. Acts should be performed for the ultimate gain of being
transferred to the spiritual kingdom, back to home, back to Godhead.

TEXTS 26-27

sad-bhave sadhu-bhave ca
sad ity etat prayujyate
prasaste karmani tatha
sac-chabdah partha yujyate

yajne tapasi dane ca
sthitih sad iti cocyate
karma caiva tad-arthiyam
sad ity evabhidhiyate

SYNONYMS

sat-bhave--in the sense of the nature of the Supreme; sadhu-bhave--in
the sense of the nature of devotion; ca--also; sat--the supreme; iti--
thus; etat--this; prayujyate--is used; prasaste--bona fide; karmani--
activities; tatha--also; sat-sabdah--the sound sat; partha--O son of
Prtha; yujyate--is used; yajne--sacrifice; tapasi--in penance; dane--
charity; ca--also; sthitih--situated; sat--the Supreme; iti--thus; ca--
and; ucyate--pronounced; karma--work; ca--also; eva--certainly; tat--
that; arthiyam--are meant; sat--Supreme; iti--thus; eva--certainly;
abhidhiyate--is practiced.

TRANSLATION

The Absolute Truth is the objective of devotional sacrifice, and it is
indicated by the word sat. These works of sacrifice, of penance and of
charity, true to the absolute nature, are performed to please the
Supreme Person, O son of Prtha.

PURPORT



The words prasaste karmani, or prescribed duties, indicate that there
are many activities prescribed in the Vedic literature which are
purificatory processes beginning from the parental care up to the end
of one's life. Such purificatory processes are adopted for the ultimate
liberation of the living entity. In all such activities it is
recommended that one should vibrate om tat sat. The words sad-bhave and
sadhu-bhave indicate the transcendental situation. One who is acting in
Krsna consciousness is called sattva, and one who is fully conscious of
the activities in Krsna consciousness is called a sadhu. In the Srimad-
Bhagavatam (3.25.25) it is said that the transcendental subject matter
becomes clear in the association of the devotees. Without good
association one cannot achieve transcendental knowledge. When
initiating a person or offering the sacred thread, one vibrates the
words om tat sat. Similarly, in all kinds of yajna performances, the
supreme object, om tat sat is invoked. These words om tat sat are used
to perfect all activities. The supreme om tat sat makes everything
complete.

TEXT 28

asraddhaya hutam dattam
tapas taptam krtam ca yat
asad ity ucyate partha
na ca tat pretya no iha

SYNONYMS

asraddhaya--without faith; hutam--offered in sacrifice; dattam--given;
tapah--penance; taptam--executed; krtam--performed; ca--also; yat--that
which; asat--false; iti--thus; ucyate--is said to be; partha--O son of
Prtha; na--never; ca--also; tat--that; pretya--after death; no--nor;
iha--in this life.

TRANSLATION

But sacrifices, austerities and charities performed without faith in
the Supreme are nonpermanent, O son of Prtha, regardless of whatever
rites are performed. They are called asat and are useless both in this
life and the next.

PURPORT

Anything done without the transcendental objective--whether it be
sacrifice, charity or penance--is useless. Therefore, in this verse, it
is declared that such activities are abominable. Everything should be
done for the Supreme in Krsna consciousness. Without such faith, and
without the proper guidance, there can never be any fruit. In all the
Vedic scriptures, faith in the Supreme is advised. In the pursuit of
all Vedic instructions, the ultimate goal is the understanding of
Krsna. No one can obtain success without following this principle.
Therefore, the best course is to work from the very beginning in Krsna
consciousness under the guidance of a bona fide spiritual master. That
is the way to make everything successful.
In the conditional state, people are attracted to worship demigods,
ghosts, or Yaksas like Kuvera. The mode of goodness is better than the
modes of passion and ignorance, but one who takes directly to Krsna
consciousness is transcendental to all three modes of material nature.
Although there is a process of gradual elevation, if one, by the



association of pure devotees, takes directly to Krsna consciousness,
that is the best way. And that is recommended in this chapter. To
achieve success in this way, one must first find the proper spiritual
master and receive training under his direction. Then one can achieve
faith in the Supreme. When that faith matures, in course of time, it is
called love of God. This love is the ultimate goal of the living
entities. One should, therefore, take to Krsna consciousness directly.
That is the message of this Seventeenth Chapter.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Seventeenth Chapter of the
Srimad Bhagavad-gita in the matter of the Divisions of Faith.

Chapter 18
Conclusion--The Perfection of Renunciation

TEXT 1

arjuna uvaca
sannyasasya maha-baho
tattvam icchami veditum
tyagasya ca hrsikesa
prthak kesi-nisudana

SYNONYMS

arjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; sannyasasya--renunciation; maha-baho--O
mighty-armed one; tattvam--truth; icchami--I wish; veditum--to
understand; tyagasya--of renunciation; ca--also; hrsikesa--O master of
the senses; prthak--differently; kesi-nisudana--O killer of the Kesi
demon.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said, O mighty-armed one, I wish to understand the purpose of
renunciation [tyaga] and of the renounced order of life [sannyasa], O
killer of the Kesi demon, Hrsikesa.

PURPORT

Actually the Bhagavad-gita is finished in seventeen chapters. The
Eighteenth Chapter is a supplementary summarization of the topics
discussed before. In every chapter of Bhagavad-gita, Lord Krsna
stresses that devotional service unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is the ultimate goal of life. This same point is summarized in
the Eighteenth Chapter as the most confidential path of knowledge. In
the first six chapters, stress was given to devotional service: yoginam
api sarvesam... "Of all yogis or transcendentalists, one who always
thinks of Me within himself is best." In the next six chapters, pure
devotional service and its nature and activity were discussed. In the
third six chapters, knowledge, renunciation, the activities of material
nature and transcendental nature, and devotional service were
described. It was concluded that all acts should be performed in
conjunction with the Supreme Lord, summarized by the words om tat sat,
which indicate Visnu, the Supreme Person. In the third part of
Bhagavad-gita, devotional service was established by the example of
past acaryas and the Brahma-sutra, the Vedanta-sutra, which cites that
devotional service is the ultimate purpose of life and nothing else.
Certain impersonalists consider themselves monopolizers of the



knowledge of Vedanta-sutra, but actually the Vedanta-sutra is meant for
understanding devotional service, for the Lord Himself is the composer
of the Vedanta-sutra, and He is its knower. That is described in the
Fifteenth Chapter. In every scripture, every Veda, devotional service
is the objective. That is explained in Bhagavad-gita.
As in the Second Chapter a synopsis of the whole subject matter was
described, similarly, in the Eighteenth Chapter also the summary of all
instruction is given. The purpose of life is indicated to be
renunciation and attainment of the transcendental position above the
three material modes of nature. Arjuna wants to clarify the two
distinct subject matters of Bhagavad-gita, namely renunciation (tyaga)
and the renounced order of life (sannyasa). Thus he is asking the
meaning of these two words.
Two words used in this verse to address the Supreme Lord--Hrsikesa and
Kesi-nisudana--are significant. Hrsikesa is Krsna, the master of all
senses, who can always help us attain mental serenity. Arjuna requests
Him to summarize everything in such a way that he can remain
equipoised. Yet he has some doubts, and doubts are always compared to
demons. He therefore addresses Krsna as Kesi-nisudana. Kesi was a most
formidable demon who was killed by the Lord; now Arjuna is expecting
Krsna to kill the demon of doubt.

TEXT 2

sri-bhagavan uvaca
kamyanam karmanam nyasam
sannyasam kavayo viduh
sarva-karma-phala-tyagam
prahus tyagam vicaksanah

SYNONYMS

sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; kamyanam--
with desire; karmanam--activities; nyasam--renunciation; sannyasam--
renounced order of life; kavayah--the learned; viduh--know; sarva--of
all; karma--activities; phala--of results; tyagam--renunciation;
prahuh--call; tyagam--renunciation; vicaksanah--the experienced.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Lord said, to give up the results of all activities is
called renunciation [tyaga] by the wise. And that state is called the
renounced order of life [sannyasa] by great learned men.

PURPORT

The performance of activities for results has to be given up. This is
the instruction of Bhagavad-gita. But activities leading to advanced
spiritual knowledge are not to be given up. This will be made clear in
the next verse. There are many prescriptions of methods for performing
sacrifice for some particular purpose in the Vedic literatures. There
are certain sacrifices to perform to attain a good son or to attain
elevation to the higher planets, but sacrifices prompted by desires
should be stopped. However, sacrifice for the purification of one's
heart or for advancement in the spiritual science should not be given
up.

TEXT 3



tyajyam dosa-vad ity eke
karma prahur manisinah
yajna-dana-tapah-karma
na tyajyam iti capare

SYNONYMS

tyajyam--must be given up; dosa-vat--as an evil; iti--thus; eke--one
group; karma--work; prahuh--said; manisinah--of great thinkers; yajna--
sacrifice; dana--charity; tapah--penance; karma--work; na--never;
tyajyam--is to be given up; iti--thus; ca--certainly; apare--others.

TRANSLATION

Some learned men declare that all kinds of fruitive activities should
be given up, but there are yet other sages who maintain that acts of
sacrifice, charity and penance should never be abandoned.

PURPORT

There are many activities in the Vedic literatures which are subjects
of contention. For instance, it is said that an animal can be killed in
a sacrifice, yet some maintain animal killing is completely abominable.
Although animal killing in a sacrifice is recommended in the Vedic
literature, the animal is not considered to be killed. The sacrifice is
to give a new life to the animal. Sometimes the animal is given a new
animal life after being killed in the sacrifice, and sometimes the
animal is promoted immediately to the human form of life. But there are
different opinions among the sages. Some say that animal killing should
always be avoided, and others say that for a specific sacrifice it is
good. All these different opinions on sacrificial activity are now
being clarified by the Lord Himself.

TEXT 4

niscayam srnu me tatra
tyage bharata-sattama
tyago hi purusa-vyaghra
tri-vidhah samprakirtitah

SYNONYMS

niscayam--certainty; srnu--hear; me--from Me; tatra--there; tyage--in
the matter of renunciation; bharata-sat-tama--O best of the Bharatas;
tyagah--renunciation; hi--certainly; purusa-vyaghra--O tiger among
human beings; tri-vidhah--three kinds; samprakirtitah--is declared.

TRANSLATION

O best of the Bharatas, hear from Me now about renunciation. O tiger
among men, there are three kinds of renunciation declared in the
scriptures.

PURPORT

Although there are differences of opinion about renunciation, here the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, gives His judgment, which



should be taken as final. After all, the Vedas are different laws given
by the Lord. Here the Lord is personally present, and His word should
be taken as final. The Lord says that the process of renunciation
should be considered in terms of the modes of material nature in which
they are performed.

TEXT 5

yajna-dana-tapah-karma
na tyajyam karyam eva tat
yajno danam tapas caiva
pavanani manisinam

SYNONYMS

yajna--sacrifice; dana--charity; tapah--penance; karma--activities; na-
-never; tyajyam--to be given up; karyam--must be done; eva--certainly;
tat--that; yajnah--sacrifice; danam--charity; tapah--penance; ca--also;
eva--certainly; pavanani--purifying; manisinam--even of the great
souls.

TRANSLATION

Acts of sacrifice, charity and penance are not to be given up but
should be performed. Indeed, sacrifice, charity and penance purify even
the great souls.

PURPORT

The yogis should perform acts for the advancement of human society.
There are many purificatory processes for advancing a human being to
spiritual life. The marriage ceremony, for example, is considered to be
one of these sacrifices. It is called vivaha-yajna. Should a sannyasi,
who is in the renounced order of life and who has given up his family
relations, encourage the marriage ceremony? The Lord says here that any
sacrifice which is meant for human welfare should never be given up.
Vivaha-yajna, the marriage ceremony, is meant to regulate the human
mind to become peaceful for spiritual advancement. For most men, this
vivaha-yajna should be encouraged even by persons in the renounced
order of life. Sannyasis should never associate with women, but that
does not mean that one who is in the lower stages of life, a young man,
should not accept a wife in the marriage ceremony. All prescribed
sacrifices are meant for achieving the Supreme Lord. Therefore, in the
lower stages, they should not be given up. Similarly, charity is for
the purification of the heart. If charity is given to suitable persons,
as described previously, it leads one to advanced spiritual life.

TEXT 6

etany api tu karmani
sangam tyaktva phalani ca
kartavyaniti me partha
niscitam matam uttamam

SYNONYMS

etani--all this; api--certainly; tu--must; karmani--activities; sangam-
-association; tyaktva--renouncing; phalani--results; ca--also;



kartavyani--as duty; iti--thus; me--My; partha--O son of Prtha;
niscitam--definite; matam--opinion; uttamam--the best.

TRANSLATION

All these activities should be performed without any expectation of
result. They should be performed as a matter of duty, O son of Prtha.
That is My final opinion.

PURPORT

Although all sacrifices are purifying, one should not expect any result
by such performances. In other words, all sacrifices which are meant
for material advancement in life should be given up, but sacrifices
that purify one's existence and elevate one to the spiritual plane
should not be stopped. Everything that leads to Krsna consciousness
must be encouraged. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam also it is said that any
activity which leads to devotional service to the Lord should be
accepted. That is the highest criterion of religion. A devotee of the
Lord should accept any kind of work, sacrifice or charity which will
help him in the discharge of devotional service to the Lord.

TEXT 7

niyatasya tu sannyasah
karmano nopapadyate
mohat tasya parityagas
tamasah parikirtitah

SYNONYMS

niyatasya--prescribed duties; tu--but; sannyasah--renunciation;
karmanah--activities; na--never; upapadyate--is deserved; mohat--by
illusion; tasya--of which; parityagah--renunciation; tamasah--in the
mode of ignorance; parikirtitah--is declared.

TRANSLATION

Prescribed duties should never be renounced. If, by illusion, one gives
up his prescribed duties, such renunciation is said to be in the mode
of ignorance.

PURPORT

Work for material satisfaction must be given up, but activities which
promote one to spiritual activity, like cooking for the Supreme Lord
and offering the food to the Lord and then accepting the food, are
recommended. It is said that a person in the renounced order of life
should not cook for himself. Cooking for oneself is prohibited, but
cooking for the Supreme Lord is not prohibited. Similarly, a sannyasi
may perform a marriage ceremony to help his disciple in the advancement
of Krsna consciousness. If one renounces such activities, it is to be
understood that he is acting in the mode of darkness.

TEXT 8

duhkham ity eva yat karma



kaya-klesa-bhayat tyajet
sa krtva rajasam tyagam
naiva tyaga-phalam labhet

SYNONYMS

duhkham--unhappy; iti--thus; eva--certainly; yat--that which; karma--
work; kaya--body; klesa--troublesome; bhayat--out of fear; tyajet--
gives up; sah--that; krtva--after doing; rajasam--in the mode of
passion; tyagam--renunciation; na eva--certainly not; tyaga--renounced;
phalam--results; labhet--gain.

TRANSLATION

Anyone who gives up prescribed duties as troublesome, or out of fear,
is said to be in the mode of passion. Such action never leads to the
elevation of renunciation.

PURPORT

One who is in Krsna consciousness should not give up earning money out
of fear that he is performing fruitive activities. If by working one
can engage his money in Krsna consciousness, or if by rising early in
the morning one can advance his transcendental Krsna consciousness, one
should not desist out of fear or because such activities are considered
troublesome. Such renunciation is in the mode of passion. The result of
passionate work is always miserable. Even if a person renounces work in
that spirit, he never gets the result of renunciation.

TEXT 9

karyam ity eva yat karma
niyatam kriyate 'rjuna
sangam tyaktva phalam caiva
sa tyagah sattviko matah

SYNONYMS

karyam--must be done; iti--thus; eva--thus; yat--that which; karma--
work; niyatam--prescribed; kriyate--performed; arjuna--O Arjuna;
sangam--association; tyaktva--giving up; phalam--result; ca--also; eva-
-certainly; sah--that; tyagah--renunciation; sattvikah--in the mode of
goodness; matah--in My opinion.

TRANSLATION

But he who performs his prescribed duty only because it ought to be
done, and renounces all attachment to the fruit--his renunciation is of
the nature of goodness, O Arjuna.

PURPORT

Prescribed duties must be performed with this mentality. One should act
without attachment for the result; he should be disassociated from the
modes of work. A man working in Krsna consciousness in a factory does
not associate himself with the work of the factory, nor with the
workers of the factory. He simply works for Krsna. And when he gives up
the result for Krsna, he is acting transcendentally.



TEXT 10

na dvesty akusalam karma
kusale nanusajjate
tyagi sattva-samavisto
medhavi chinna-samsayah

SYNONYMS

na--never; dvesti--hates; akusalam--inauspicious; karma--work; kusale--
in the auspicious; na--nor; anusajjate--becomes attached; tyagi--the
renouncer; sattva--goodness; samavistah--absorbed in; medhavi--
intelligent; chinna--cut up; samsayah--all doubts.

TRANSLATION

Those who are situated in the mode of goodness, who neither hate
inauspicious work nor are attached to auspicious work, have no doubts
about work.

PURPORT

A person in Krsna consciousness or in the mode of goodness does not
hate anyone or anything which troubles his body. He does work in the
proper place and at the proper time without fearing the troublesome
effects of his duty. Such a person situated in transcendence should be
understood to be most intelligent and beyond all doubts in his
activities.

TEXT 11

na hi deha-bhrta sakyam
tyaktum karmany asesatah
yas tu karma-phala-tyagi
sa tyagity abhidhiyate

SYNONYMS

na--never; hi--certainly; deha-bhrta--of the embodied; sakyam--
possible; tyaktum--to renounce; karmani--activities of; asesatah--
altogether; yah tu--anyone who; karma--work; phala--results; tyagi--
renouncer; sah--he; tyagi--the renouncer; iti--thus; abhidhiyate--it is
said.

TRANSLATION

It is indeed impossible for an embodied being to give up all
activities. Therefore it is said that he who renounces the fruits of
action is one who has truly renounced.

PURPORT

It is said in Bhagavad-gita that one can never give up work at any
time. Therefore he who works for Krsna and does not enjoy the fruitive
results, who offers everything to Krsna, is actually a renouncer. There
are many members of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness
who work very hard in their office or in the factory or some other



place, and whatever they earn they give to the Society. Such highly
elevated souls are actually sannyasis and are situated in the renounced
order of life. It is clearly outlined here how to renounce the fruits
of work and for what purpose fruits should be renounced.

TEXT 12

anistam istam misram ca
tri-vidham karmanah phalam
bhavaty atyaginam pretya
na tu sannyasinam kvacit

SYNONYMS

anistam--leading to hell; istam--leading to heaven; misram ca--or
mixture; tri-vidham--three kinds; karmanah--work; phalam--result;
bhavati--becomes; atyaginam--of the renouncer; pretya--after death; na
tu--but not; sannyasinam--of the renounced order; kvacit--at any time.

TRANSLATION

For one who is not renounced, the threefold fruits of action--
desirable, undesirable and mixed--accrue after death. But those who are
in the renounced order of life have no such results to suffer or enjoy.

PURPORT

A person in Krsna consciousness acting in knowledge of his relationship
with Krsna is always liberated. Therefore he does not have to enjoy or
suffer the results of his acts after death.

TEXT 13

pancaitani maha-baho
karanani nibodha me
sankhye krtante proktani
siddhaye sarva-karmanam

adhisthanam tatha karta
karanam ca prthag-vidham
vividhas ca prthak cesta
daivam caivatra pancamam

SYNONYMS

panca--five; etani--all these; maha-baho--O mighty-armed one; karanani-
-cause; nibodha--just understand; me--from Me; sankhye--in the Vedas;
krta-ante--after performance; proktani--said; siddhaye--perfection;
sarva--all; karmanam--actuated. adhisthanam--place; tatha--also; karta-
-worker; karanam ca--and instruments; prthak-vidham--different kinds;
vividhah ca--varieties; prthak--separately; cestah--endeavor; daivam--
the Supreme; ca--also; eva--certainly; atra--here; pancamam--five.

TRANSLATION

O mighty-armed Arjuna, learn from Me of the five factors which bring
about the accomplishment of all action. These are declared in sankhya



philosophy to be the place of action, the performer, the senses, the
endeavor, and ultimately the Supersoul.

PURPORT

A question may be raised that since any activity performed must have
some reaction, how is it that the person in Krsna consciousness does
not suffer or enjoy the reactions of work? The Lord is citing Vedanta
philosophy to show how this is possible. He says that there are five
causes for all activities, and for success in all activity, one should
know these five causes. Sankhya means the stalk of knowledge, and
Vedanta is the final stalk of knowledge accepted by all leading
acaryas. Even Sankara accepts Vedanta-sutra as such. Therefore such
authority should be consulted.
The ultimate will is invested in the Supersoul, as it is stated in the
Gita, sarvasya caham hrdi sannivistah. He is engaging everyone in
certain activities. Acts done under His direction from within yield no
reaction, either in this life or in the life after death.
The instruments of action are the senses, and by senses the soul acts
in various ways, and for each and every action there is a different
endeavor. But all one's activities depend on the will of the Supersoul,
who is seated within the heart as a friend. The Supreme Lord is the
supercause. Under these circumstances, he who is acting in Krsna
consciousness under the direction of the Supersoul situated within the
heart is naturally not bound by any activity. Those in complete Krsna
consciousness are not ultimately responsible for their actions.
Everything is dependent on the supreme will, the Supersoul, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 15

sarira-van-manobhir yat
karma prarabhate narah
nyayyam va viparitam va
pancaite tasya hetavah

SYNONYMS

sarira--body; vak--speech; manobhih--by the mind; yat--anything; karma-
-work; prarabhate--begins; narah--a person; nyayyam--right; va--or;
viparitam--the opposite; va--or; panca--five; ete--all these; tasya--
its; hetavah--causes.

TRANSLATION

Whatever right or wrong action a man performs by body, mind or speech
is caused by these five factors.

PURPORT

The words "right" and "wrong" are very significant in this verse. Right
work is work done in terms of the prescribed directions in the
scriptures, and wrong work is work done against the principles of the
scriptural injunctions. But whatever is done requires these five
factors for its complete performance.

TEXT 16



tatraivam sati kartaram
atmanam kevalam tu yah
pasyaty akrta-buddhitvan
na sa pasyati durmatih

SYNONYMS

tatra--there; evam--certainly; sati--being; kartaram--of the worker;
atmanam--the self; kevalam--only; tu--but; yah--anyone; pasyati--sees;
akrta-buddhitvat--due to unintelligence; na--never; sah--he; pasyati--
sees; durmatih--foolish.

TRANSLATION

Therefore one who thinks himself the only doer, not considering the
five factors, is certainly not very intelligent and cannot see things
as they are.

PURPORT

A foolish person cannot understand that the Supersoul is sitting as a
friend within and conducting his actions. Although the material causes
are the place, the worker, the endeavor and the senses, the final cause
is the Supreme, the Personality of Godhead. Therefore, one should see
not only the four material causes, but the supreme efficient cause as
well. One who does not see the Supreme thinks himself to be the doer.

TEXT 17

yasya nahankrto bhavo
buddhir yasya na lipyate
hatvapi sa imal lokan
na hanti na nibadhyate

SYNONYMS

yasya--of one who; na--never; ahankrtah--false ego; bhavah--nature;
buddhih--intelligence; yasya--one who; na--never; lipyate--is attached;
hatva api--even killing; sah--he; iman--this; lokan--world; na--never;
hanti--kills; na--never; nibadhyate--becomes entangled.

TRANSLATION

One who is not motivated by false ego, whose intelligence is not
entangled, though he kills men in this world, is not the slayer. Nor is
he bound by his actions.

PURPORT

In this verse the Lord informs Arjuna that the desire not to fight
arises from false ego. Arjuna thought himself to be the doer of action,
but he did not consider the supreme sanction within and without. If one
does not know that a supersanction is there, why should he act? But one
who knows the instrument of work, himself as the worker, and the
Supreme Lord as the supreme sanctioner is perfect in doing everything.
Such a person is never in illusion. Personal activity and
responsibility arise from false ego and godlessness, or a lack of Krsna
consciousness. Anyone who is acting in Krsna consciousness under the



direction of the Supersoul or the Supreme Personality of Godhead, even
though killing, does not kill. Nor is he ever affected with the
reaction of such killing. When a soldier kills under the command of a
superior officer, he is not subject to be judged. But if a soldier
kills on his own personal account, then he is certainly judged by a
court of law.

TEXT 18

jnanam jneyam parijnata
tri-vidha karma-codana
karanam karma karteti
tri-vidhah karma-sangrahah

SYNONYMS

jnanam--knowledge; jneyam--objective; parijnata--the knower; tri-vidha-
-three kinds; karma--work; codana--impetus; karanam--the senses; karma-
-work; karta--the doer; iti--thus; tri-vidhah--three kinds; karma--
work; sangrahah--accumulation.

TRANSLATION

Knowledge, the object of knowledge and the knower are the three factors
which motivate action; the senses, the work and the doer comprise the
threefold basis of action.

PURPORT

There are three kinds of impetus for daily work: knowledge, the object
of knowledge and the knower. The instruments of work, the work itself
and the worker are called the constituents of work. Any work done by
any human being has these elements. Before one acts, there is some
impetus, which is called inspiration. Any solution arrived at before
work is actualized is a subtle form of work. Then work takes the form
of action. First one has to undergo the psychological processes of
thinking, feeling and willing, and that is called impetus. Actually the
faith to perform acts is called knowledge. The inspiration to work is
the same if it comes from the scripture or from the instruction of the
spiritual master. When the inspiration is there and the worker is
there, then actual activity takes place by the help of the senses. The
mind is the center of all senses, and the object is work itself. These
are the different phases of work as described in Bhagavad-gita. The sum
total of all activities is called accumulation of work.

TEXT 19

jnanam karma ca karta ca
tridhaiva guna-bhedatah
procyate guna-sankhyane
yathavac chrnu tany api

SYNONYMS

jnanam--knowledge; karma--work; ca--also; karta--worker; ca--also;
tridha--three kinds; eva--certainly; guna-bhedatah--in terms of
different modes of material nature; procyate--is said; guna-sankhyane--



in terms of different modes; yatha-vat--as they act; srnu--hear; tani--
all of them; api--also.

TRANSLATION

In accordance with the three modes of material nature, there are three
kinds of knowledge, action, and performers of action. Listen as I
describe them.

PURPORT

In the Fourteenth Chapter the three divisions of the modes of material
nature were elaborately described. In that chapter it was said that the
mode of goodness is illuminating, the mode of passion materialistic,
and the mode of ignorance conducive to laziness and indolence. All the
modes of material nature are binding; they are not sources of
liberation. Even in the mode of goodness one is conditioned. In the
Seventeenth Chapter, the different types of worship by different types
of men in different modes of material nature were described. In this
verse, the Lord wishes to speak about the different types of knowledge,
workers, and work itself according to the three material modes.

TEXT 20

sarva-bhutesu yenaikam
bhavam avyayam iksate
avibhaktam vibhaktesu
taj jnanam viddhi sattvikam

SYNONYMS

sarva-bhutesu--in all living entities; yena--by whom; ekam--one;
bhavam--situation; avyayam--imperishable; iksate--does see; avibhaktam-
-undivided; vibhaktesu--in the numberless divided; tat--that; jnanam--
knowledge; viddhi--know; sattvikam--in the mode of goodness.

TRANSLATION

That knowledge by which one undivided spiritual nature is seen in all
existences, undivided in the divided, is knowledge in the mode of
goodness.

PURPORT

A person who sees one spirit soul in every living being, whether a
demigod, human being, animal, bird, beast, aquatic or plant, possesses
knowledge in the mode of goodness. In all living entities, one spirit
soul is there, although they have different bodies in terms of their
previous work. As described in the Seventh Chapter, the manifestation
of the living force in every body is due to the superior nature of the
Supreme Lord. Thus to see that one superior nature, that living force,
in every body is to see in the mode of goodness. That living energy is
imperishable, although the bodies are perishable. The difference is
perceived in terms of the body because there are many forms of material
existence in conditional life; therefore they appear to be divided.
Such impersonal knowledge finally leads to self-realization.

TEXT 21



prthaktvena tu yaj jnanam
nana-bhavan prthag-vidhan
vetti sarvesu bhutesu
taj jnanam viddhi rajasam

SYNONYMS

prthaktvena--because of division; tu--but; yat jnanam--which knowledge;
nana-bhavan--multifarious situations; prthak-vidhan--differently;
vetti--one who knows; sarvesu--in all; bhutesu--living entities; tat
jnanam--that knowledge; viddhi--must be known; rajasam--in terms of
passion.

TRANSLATION

That knowledge by which a different type of living entity is seen to be
dwelling in different bodies is knowledge in the mode of passion.

PURPORT

The concept that the material body is the living entity and that with
the destruction of the body the consciousness is also destroyed is
called knowledge in the mode of passion. According to that knowledge,
bodies differ from one another because of the development of different
types of consciousness, otherwise there is no separate soul which
manifests consciousness. The body is itself the soul, and there is no
separate soul beyond the body. According to such knowledge,
consciousness is temporary. Or else there are no individual souls, but
there is an all-pervading soul, which is full of knowledge, and this
body is a manifestation of temporary ignorance. Or beyond this body
there is no special individual or supreme soul. All such conceptions
are considered products of the mode of passion.

TEXT 22

yat tu krtsna-vad ekasmin
karye saktam ahaitukam
atattvartha-vad alpam ca
tat tamasam udahrtam

SYNONYMS

yat--that which; tu--but; krtsna-vat--all in all; ekasmin--in one;
karye--work; saktam--attached; ahaitukam--without cause; atattva-artha-
vat--without reality; alpam--very meager; ca--and; tat--that; tamasam--
in the mode of darkness; udahrtam--is spoken.

TRANSLATION

And that knowledge by which one is attached to one kind of work as the
all in all, without knowledge of the truth, and which is very meager,
is said to be in the mode of darkness.

PURPORT

The "knowledge" of the common man is always in the mode of darkness or
ignorance because every living entity in conditional life is born into



the mode of ignorance. One who does not develop knowledge through the
authorities or scriptural injunctions has knowledge that is limited to
the body. He is not concerned about acting in terms of the directions
of scripture. For him God is money, and knowledge means the
satisfaction of bodily demands. Such knowledge has no connection with
the Absolute Truth. It is more or less like the knowledge of the
ordinary animals: the knowledge of eating, sleeping, defending and
mating. Such knowledge is described here as the product of the mode of
darkness. In other words, knowledge concerning the spirit soul beyond
this body is called knowledge in the mode of goodness, and knowledge
producing many theories and doctrines by dint of mundane logic and
mental speculation is the product of the mode of passion, and knowledge
concerned with only keeping the body comfortable is said to be in the
mode of ignorance.

TEXT 23

niyatam sanga-rahitam
araga-dvesatah krtam
aphala-prepsuna karma
yat tat sattvikam ucyate

SYNONYMS

niyatam--regulative; sanga-rahitam--without attachment; araga-dvesatah-
-without love or hatred; krtam--done; aphala-prepsuna--without fruitive
result; karma--acts; yat--which; tat--that; sattvikam--in the mode of
goodness; ucyate--is called.

TRANSLATION

As for actions, that action in accordance with duty, which is performed
without attachment, without love or hate, by one who has renounced
fruitive results, is called action in the mode of goodness.

PURPORT

Regulated occupational duties, as prescribed in the scriptures in terms
of the different orders and divisions of society, performed without
attachment or proprietary rights and therefore without any love or
hatred, and performed in Krsna consciousness for the satisfaction of
the Supreme, without self-satisfaction or self-gratification, are
called actions in the mode of goodness.

TEXT 24

yat tu kamepsuna karma
sahankarena va punah
kriyate bahulayasam
tad rajasam udahrtam

SYNONYMS

yat--that which; tu--but; kama-ipsuna--with fruitive result; karma--
work; sa-ahankarena--with ego; va--or; punah--again; kriyate--
performed; bahula-ayasam--with great labor; tat--that; rajasam--in the
mode of passion; udahrtam--is said to be.



TRANSLATION

But action performed with great effort by one seeking to gratify his
desires, and which is enacted from a sense of false ego, is called
action in the mode of passion.

TEXT 25

anubandham ksayam himsam
anapeksya ca paurusam
mohad arabhyate karma
yat tat tamasam ucyate

SYNONYMS

anubandham--future bondage; ksayam--destruction; himsam--violence;
anapeksya--without consideration of consequences; ca--also; paurusam--
distressing to others; mohat--by illusion; arabhyate--begun; karma--
work; yat--which; tat--that; tamasam--in the mode of ignorance; ucyate-
-is said to be.

TRANSLATION

And that action performed in ignorance and delusion without
consideration of future bondage or consequences, which inflicts injury
and is impractical, is said to be action in the mode of ignorance.

PURPORT

One has to give account of one's actions to the state or to the agents
of the Supreme Lord called the Yamadutas. Irresponsible work is
destructive because it destroys the regulative principles of scriptural
injunction. It is often based on violence and is distressing to other
living entities. Such irresponsible work is carried out in the light of
one's personal experience. This is called illusion. And all such
illusory work is a product of the mode of ignorance.

TEXT 26

mukta-sango 'naham-vadi
dhrty-utsaha-samanvitah
siddhy-asiddhyor nirvikarah
karta sattvika ucyate

SYNONYMS

mukta-sangah--liberated from all material association; anaham-vadi--
without false ego; dhrti-utsaha--with great enthusiasm; samanvitah--
qualified in that way; siddhi--perfection; asiddhyoh--failure;
nirvikarah--without change; karta--worker; sattvikah--in the mode of
goodness; ucyate--is said to be.

TRANSLATION

The worker who is free from all material attachments and false ego, who
is enthusiastic and resolute and who is indifferent to success or
failure, is a worker in the mode of goodness.



PURPORT

A person in Krsna consciousness is always transcendental to the
material modes of nature. He has no expectations for the result of the
work entrusted to him because he is above false ego and pride. Still,
he is always enthusiastic till the completion of such work. He does not
worry about the distress undertaken; he is always enthusiastic. He does
not care for success or failure; he is equal in both distress or
happiness. Such a worker is situated in the mode of goodness.

TEXT 27

ragi karma-phala-prepsur
lubdho himsatmako 'sucih
harsa-sokanvitah karta
rajasah parikirtitah

SYNONYMS

ragi--very much attached; karma-phala--to the fruit of the work;
prepsuh--desiring; lubdhah--greedy; himsa-atmakah--and always envious;
asucih--unclean; harsa-soka-anvitah--complicated, with joy and sorrow;
karta--such a worker; rajasah--in the mode of passion; parikirtitah--is
declared.

TRANSLATION

But that worker who is attached to the fruits of his labor and who
passionately wants to enjoy them, who is greedy, envious and impure and
moved by happiness and distress, is a worker in the mode of passion.

PURPORT

A person is too much attached to a certain kind of work or to the
result because he has too much attachment for materialism or hearth and
home, wife and children. Such a person has no desire for higher
elevation in life. He is simply concerned with making this world as
materially comfortable as possible. He is generally very greedy, and he
thinks that anything attained by him is permanent and never to be lost.
Such a person is envious of others and prepared to do anything wrong
for sense gratification. Therefore such a person is unclean, and he
does not care whether his earning is pure or impure. He is very happy
if his work is successful and very much distressed when his work is not
successful. Such a man is in the mode of passion.

TEXT 28

ayuktah prakrtah stabdhah
satho naiskrtiko 'lasah
visadi dirgha-sutri ca
karta tamasa ucyate

SYNONYMS

ayuktah--without reference to scriptural injunctions; prakrtah--
materialistic; stabdhah--obstinate; sathah--deceitful; naiskrtikah--
expert in insulting others; alasah--lazy; visadi--morose; dirgha-sutri-



-procrastinating; ca--also; karta--worker; tamasah--in the mode of
ignorance; ucyate--is said to be.

TRANSLATION

And that worker who is always engaged in work against the injunctions
of the scripture, who is materialistic, obstinate, cheating and expert
in insulting others, who is lazy, always morose and procrastinating, is
a worker in the mode of ignorance.

PURPORT

In the scriptural injunctions we find what sort of work should be
performed and what sort of work should not be performed. Those who do
not care for those injunctions engage in work not to be done, and such
persons are generally materialistic. They work according to the modes
of nature, not according to the injunctions of the scripture. Such
workers are not very gentle, and generally they are always cunning and
expert in insulting others. They are very lazy; even though they have
some duty, they do not do it properly, and they put it aside to be done
later on. Therefore they appear to be morose. They procrastinate;
anything which can be done in an hour they drag on for years. Such
workers are situated in the mode of ignorance.

TEXT 29

buddher bhedam dhrtes caiva
gunatas tri-vidham srnu
procyamanam asesena
prthaktvena dhananjaya

SYNONYMS

buddheh--of intelligence; bhedam--differences; dhrteh--of steadiness;
ca--also; eva--certainly; gunatah--by the modes of material nature;
tri-vidham--the three kinds of; srnu--just hear; procyamanam--as
described by Me; asesena--in detail; prthaktvena--differently;
dhananjaya--O winner of wealth.

TRANSLATION

Now, O winner of wealth, please listen as I tell you in detail of the
three kinds of understanding and determination according to the three
modes of nature.

PURPORT

Now after explaining knowledge, the object of knowledge and the knower,
in three different divisions according to the modes of material nature,
the Lord is explaining the intelligence and determination of the worker
in the same way.

TEXT 30

pravrttim ca nivrttim ca
karyakarye bhayabhaye
bandham moksam ca ya vetti
buddhih sa partha sattviki



SYNONYMS

pravrttim--deserving; ca--also; nivrttim--not deserving; ca--and;
karya--work; akarye--reaction; bhaya--fearful; abhaye--fearlessness;
bandham--obligation; moksam ca--and liberation; ya--that which; vetti--
knows; buddhih--understanding; sa--that; partha--O son of Prtha;
sattviki--in the mode of goodness.

TRANSLATION

O son of Prtha, that understanding by which one knows what ought to be
done and what ought not to be done, what is to be feared and what is
not to be feared, what is binding and what is liberating, that
understanding is established in the mode of goodness.

PURPORT

Actions which are performed in terms of the directions of the
scriptures are called pravrtti, or actions that deserve to be
performed, and actions which are not so directed are not to be
performed. One who does not know the scriptural directions becomes
entangled in the actions and reactions of work. Understanding which
discriminates by intelligence is situated in the mode of goodness.

TEXT 31

yaya dharmam adharmam ca
karyam cakaryam eva ca
ayathavat prajanati
buddhih sa partha rajasi

SYNONYMS

yaya--by which; dharmam--principles of religion; adharmam--and
irreligion; ca--and; karyam--work; ca--also; akaryam--what ought not to
be done; eva--certainly; ca--also; ayatha-vat--not perfectly;
prajanati--knows; buddhih--intelligence; sa--that; partha--O son of
Prtha; rajasi--in the mode of passion.

TRANSLATION

And that understanding which cannot distinguish between the religious
way of life and the irreligious, between action that should be done and
action that should not be done, that imperfect understanding, O son of
Prtha, is in the mode of passion.

PURPORT

Intelligence in the mode of passion is always working perversely. It
accepts religions which are not actually religions and rejects actual
religion. All views and activities are misguided. Men of passionate
intelligence understand a great soul to be a common man and accept a
common man as a great soul. They think truth to be untruth and accept
untruth as truth. In all activities they simply take the wrong path;
therefore their intelligence is in the mode of passion.

TEXT 32



adharmam dharmam iti ya
manyate tamasavrta
sarvarthan viparitams ca
buddhih sa partha tamasi

SYNONYMS

adharmam--irreligion; dharmam--religion; iti--thus; ya--which; manyate-
-thinks; tamasa--by illusion; avrta--covered; sarva-arthan--all things;
viparitan--the wrong direction; ca--also; buddhih--intelligence; sa--
that; partha--O son of Prtha; tamasi--the mode of ignorance.

TRANSLATION

That understanding which considers irreligion to be religion and
religion to be irreligion, under the spell of illusion and darkness,
and strives always in the wrong direction, O Partha, is in the mode of
ignorance.

PURPORT

Intelligence in the mode of ignorance is always working the opposite of
the way it should. It accepts religions which are not actually
religions and rejects actual religion. Men in ignorance understand a
great soul to be a common man and accept a common man as a great soul.
They think truth to be untruth and accept untruth as truth. In all
activities they simply take the wrong path; therefore their
intelligence is in the mode of ignorance.

TEXT 33

dhrtya yaya dharayate
manah-pranendriya-kriyah
yogenavyabhicarinya
dhrtih sa partha sattviki

SYNONYMS

dhrtya--determination; yaya--by which; dharayate--is sustained; manah--
mind; prana--life; indriya--senses; kriyah--activities; yogena--by yoga
practice; avyabhicarinya--without any break; dhrtih--such
determination; sa--that; partha--O son of Prtha; sattviki--in the mode
of goodness.

TRANSLATION

O son of Prtha, that determination which is unbreakable, which is
sustained with steadfastness by yoga practice, and thus controls the
mind, life, and the acts of the senses, is in the mode of goodness.

PURPORT

Yoga is a means to understand the Supreme Soul. One who is steadily
fixed in the Supreme Soul with determination, concentrating one's mind,
life and sensual activities on the Supreme, engages in Krsna
consciousness. That sort of determination is in the mode of goodness.
The word avyabhicarinya is very significant, for it refers to persons



who are engaged in Krsna consciousness and are never deviated by any
other activity.

TEXT 34

yaya tu dharma-kamarthan
dhrtya dharayate 'rjuna
prasangena phalakanksi
dhrtih sa partha rajasi

SYNONYMS

yaya--by which; tu--but; dharma-kama-arthan--for religiosity and
economic development; dhrtya--by determination; dharayate--in such
terms; arjuna--O Arjuna; prasangena--for that; phala-akanksi--desiring
fruitive results; dhrtih--determination; sa--that; partha--O son of
Prtha; rajasi--in the mode of passion.

TRANSLATION

And that determination by which one holds fast to fruitive results in
religion, economic development and sense gratification is of the nature
of passion, O Arjuna.

PURPORT

Any person who is always desirous of fruitive results in religious or
economic activities, whose only desire is sense gratification, and
whose mind, life and senses are thus engaged, is in the mode of
passion.

TEXT 35

yaya svapnam bhayam sokam
visadam madam eva ca
na vimuncati durmedha
dhrtih sa partha tamasi

SYNONYMS

yaya--by which; svapnam--dream; bhayam--fearfulness; sokam--
lamentation; visadam--moroseness; madam--illusion; eva--certainly; ca--
also; na--never; vimuncati--is liberated; durmedha--unintelligent;
dhrtih--determination; sa--that; partha--O son of Prtha; tamasi--in the
mode of ignorance.

TRANSLATION

And that determination which cannot go beyond dreaming, fearfulness,
lamentation, moroseness and, illusion--such unintelligent determination
is in the mode of darkness.

PURPORT

It should not be concluded that a person in the mode of goodness does
not dream. Here dream means too much sleep. Dreaming is always present;
either in the mode of goodness, passion or ignorance, dreaming is a
natural occurrence. But those who cannot avoid oversleeping, who cannot



avoid the pride of enjoying material objects and who are always
dreaming of lording it over the material world, whose life, mind and
senses are thus engaged, are considered to be in the mode of ignorance.

TEXT 36

sukham tv idanim tri-vidham
srnu me bharatarsabha
abhyasad ramate yatra
duhkhantam ca nigacchati

yat tad agre visam iva
pariname 'mrtopamam
tat sukham sattvikam proktam
atma-buddhi-prasada-jam

SYNONYMS

sukham--happiness; tu--but; idanim--now; tri-vidham--three kinds; srnu-
-hear; me--from Me; bharata-rsabha--O best amongst the Bharatas;
abhyasat--by practice; ramate--enjoyer; yatra--where; duhkha--distress;
antam--end; ca--also; nigacchati--gains. yat--that which; tat--that;
agre--in the beginning; visam iva--like poison; pariname--at the end;
amrta--nectar; upamam--compared to; tat--that; sukham--happiness;
sattvikam--in the mode of goodness; proktam--is said; atma--self;
buddhi--intelligence; prasada-jam--satisfactory.

TRANSLATION

O best of the Bharatas, now please hear from Me about the three kinds
of happiness which the conditioned soul enjoys, and by which he
sometimes comes to the end of all distress. That which in the beginning
may be just like poison but at the end is just like nectar and which
awakens one to self-realization is said to be happiness in the mode of
goodness.

PURPORT

A conditioned soul tries to enjoy material happiness again and again.
Thus he chews the chewed, but, sometimes, in the course of such
enjoyment, he becomes relieved from material entanglement by
association with a great soul. In other words, a conditioned soul is
always engaged in some type of sense gratification, but when he
understands by good association that it is only a repetition of the
same thing, and he is awakened to his real Krsna consciousness, he is
sometimes relieved from such repetitive so-called happiness.
In the pursuit of self-realization, one has to follow many rules and
regulations to control the mind and the senses and to concentrate the
mind on the self. All these procedures are very difficult, bitter like
poison, but if one is successful in following the regulations and comes
to the transcendental position, he begins to drink real nectar, and he
enjoys life.

TEXT 38

visayendriya-samyogad
yat tad agre 'mrtopamam
pariname visam iva



tat sukham rajasam smrtam

SYNONYMS

visaya--objects of the senses; indriya--senses; samyogat--combination;
yat--which; tat--that; agre--in the beginning; amrta-upamam--just like
nectar; pariname--at the end; visam iva--like poison; tat--that;
sukham--happiness; rajasam--in the mode of passion; smrtam--is
considered.

TRANSLATION

That happiness which is derived from contact of the senses with their
objects and which appears like nectar at first but poison at the end is
said to be of the nature of passion.

PURPORT

A young man and a young woman meet, and the senses drive the young man
to see her, to touch her and to have sexual intercourse. In the
beginning this may be very pleasing to the senses, but at the end, or
after some time, it becomes just like poison. They are separated or
there is divorce, there is lamentation, there is sorrow, etc. Such
happiness is always in the mode of passion. Happiness derived from a
combination of the senses and the sense objects is always a cause of
distress and should be avoided by all means.

TEXT 39

yad agre canubandhe ca
sukham mohanam atmanah
nidralasya-pramadottham
tat tamasam udahrtam

SYNONYMS

yat--that which; agre--in the beginning; ca--also; anubandhe--by
binding; ca--also; sukham--happiness; mohanam--illusion; atmanah--of
the self; nidra--sleeping; alasya--laziness; pramada--illusion; uttham-
-produced of; tat--that; tamasam--in the mode of ignorance; udahrtam--
is said to be.

TRANSLATION

And that happiness which is blind to self-realization, which is
delusion from beginning to end and which arises from sleep, laziness
and illusion is said to be of the nature of ignorance.

PURPORT

One who takes pleasure in laziness and in sleep is certainly in the
mode of darkness, and one who has no idea how to act and how not to act
is also in the mode of ignorance. For the person in the mode of
ignorance, everything is illusion. There is no happiness either in the
beginning or the end. For the person in the mode of passion there might
be some kind of ephemeral happiness in the beginning and at the end
distress, but for the person in the mode of ignorance there is only
distress both in the beginning and at the end.



TEXT 40

na tad asti prthivyam va
divi devesu va punah
sattvam prakrti-jair muktam
yad ebhih syat tribhir gunaih

SYNONYMS

na--not; tat--that; asti--there is; prthivyam--within the universe; va-
-or; divi--in the higher planetary system; devesu--amongst the
demigods; va--or; punah--again; sattvam--existence; prakrti-jaih--under
the influence of material nature; muktam--liberated; yat--that; ebhih--
by this; syat--so becomes; tribhih--by three; gunaih--modes of material
nature.

TRANSLATION

There is no being existing, either here or among the demigods in the
higher planetary systems, which is freed from the three modes of
material nature.

PURPORT

The Lord here summarizes the total influence of the three modes of
material nature all over the universe.

TEXT 41

brahmana-ksatriya-visam
sudranam ca parantapa
karmani pravibhaktani
svabhava-prabhavair gunaih

SYNONYMS

brahmana--the brahmanas; ksatriya--the ksatriyas; visam--the vaisyas;
sudranam--the sudras; ca--and; parantapa--O subduer of the enemies;
karmani--activities; pravibhaktani--are divided; svabhava--own nature;
prabhavaih--born of; gunaih--by the modes of material nature.

TRANSLATION

Brahmanas, ksatriyas, vaisyas and sudras are distinguished by their
qualities of work, O chastiser of the enemy, in accordance with the
modes of nature.

TEXT 42

samo damas tapah saucam
ksantir arjavam eva ca
jnanam vijnanam astikyam
brahma-karma svabhava-jam

SYNONYMS



samah--peacefulness; damah--self-control; tapah--austerity; saucam--
purity; ksantih--tolerance; arjavam--honesty; eva--certainly; ca--and;
jnanam--knowledge; vijnanam--wisdom; astikyam--religiousness; brahma--
of a brahmana; karma--duty; svabhava-jam--born of his own nature.

TRANSLATION

Peacefulness, self-control, austerity, purity, tolerance, honesty,
knowledge, wisdom and religiousness--these are the qualities by which
the brahmanas work.

TEXT 43

sauryam tejo dhrtir daksyam
yuddhe capy apalayanam
danam isvara-bhavas ca
ksatram karma svabhava-jam

SYNONYMS

sauryam--heroism; tejah--power; dhrtih--determination; daksyam--
resourcefulness; yuddhe--in battle; ca--and; api--also; apalayanam--not
fleeing; danam--generosity; isvara--leadership; bhavah--nature; ca--
and; ksatram--ksatriya; karma--duty; svabhava-jam--born of his own
nature.

TRANSLATION

Heroism, power, determination, resourcefulness, courage in battle,
generosity, and leadership are the qualities of work for the ksatriyas.

TEXT 44

krsi-go-raksya-vanijyam
vaisya-karma svabhava-jam
paricaryatmakam karma
sudrasyapi svabhava-jam

SYNONYMS

krsi--plowing; go--cows; raksya--protection; vanijyam--trade; vaisya--
vaisya; karma--duty; svabhava-jam--born of his own nature; paricarya--
service; atmakam--nature; karma--duty; sudrasya--of the sudra; api--
also; svabhava-jam--born of his own nature.

TRANSLATION

Farming, cow protection and business are the qualities of work for the
vaisyas, and for the sudras there is labor and service to others.

TEXT 45

sve sve karmany abhiratah
samsiddhim labhate narah
sva-karma-niratah siddhim
yatha vindati tac chrnu

SYNONYMS



sve--own; sve--own; karmani--in work; abhiratah--following; samsiddhim-
-perfection; labhate--achieves; narah--a man; sva-karma--by his own
duty; niratah--engaged; siddhim--perfection; yatha--as; vindati--
attains; tat--that; srnu--listen.

TRANSLATION

By following his qualities of work, every man can become perfect. Now
please hear from Me how this can be done.

TEXT 46

yatah pravrttir bhutanam
yena sarvam idam tatam
sva-karmana tam abhyarcya
siddhim vindati manavah

SYNONYMS

yatah--from whom; pravrttih--the emanation; bhutanam--of all living
entities; yena--by whom; sarvam--all; idam--this; tatam--is pervaded;
sva-karmana--in his own duties; tam--Him; abhyarcya--by worshiping;
siddhim--perfection; vindati--achieves; manavah--a man.

TRANSLATION

By worship of the Lord, who is the source of all beings and who is all-
pervading, man can, in the performance of his own duty, attain
perfection.

PURPORT

As stated in the Fifteenth Chapter, all living beings are fragmental
parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord. As such the Supreme Lord is the
beginning of all living entities. This is confirmed in the Vedanta-
sutra--janmady asya yatah. The Supreme Lord is therefore the beginning
of life of every living entity. And the Supreme Lord, by His two
energies, His external energy and internal energy, is all-pervading.
Therefore one should worship the Supreme Lord with His energies.
Generally the Vaisnava devotees worship the Supreme Lord with His
internal energy. His external energy is a perverted reflection of the
internal energy. The external energy is a background, but the Supreme
Lord by the expansion of His plenary portion as Paramatma is situated
everywhere. He is the Supersoul of all demigods, all human beings, all
animals, everywhere. One should therefore know that as part and parcel
of the Supreme Lord it is his duty to render service unto the Supreme.
Everyone should be engaged in devotional service to the Lord in full
Krsna consciousness. That is recommended in this verse.
Everyone should think that he is engaged in a particular type of
occupation by Hrsikesa, the master of the senses. And, by the result of
the work in which one is engaged, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Sri Krsna, should be worshiped. If one thinks always in this way, in
full Krsna consciousness, then, by the grace of the Lord, he becomes
fully aware of everything. That is the perfection of life. The Lord
says in Bhagavad-gita (12.7), tesam aham samuddharta. The Supreme Lord
Himself takes charge of delivering such a devotee. That is the highest



perfection of life. In whatever occupation one may be engaged, if he
serves the Supreme Lord, he will achieve the highest perfection.

TEXT 47

sreyan sva-dharmo vigunah
para-dharmat sv-anusthitat
svabhava-niyatam karma
kurvan napnoti kilbisam

SYNONYMS

sreyan--better; sva-dharmah--one's own occupation; vigunah--imperfectly
performed; para-dharmat--another's occupation; su-anusthitat--perfectly
done; svabhava-niyatam--prescribed duties according to one's nature;
karma--work; kurvan--performing; na--never; apnoti--achieve; kilbisam--
sinful reactions.

TRANSLATION

It is better to engage in one's own occupation, even though one may
perform it imperfectly, than to accept another's occupation and perform
it perfectly. Prescribed duties according to one's nature, are never
affected by sinful reactions.

PURPORT

One's occupational duty is prescribed in Bhagavad-gita. As already
discussed in previous verses, the duties of a brahmana, ksatriya,
vaisya and sudra are prescribed according to the particular modes of
nature. One should not imitate another's duty. A man who is by nature
attracted to the kind of work done by sudras should not artificially
claim himself to be a brahmana, although he may have been born into a
brahmana family. In this way one should work according to his own
nature; no work is abominable, if performed in the service of the
Supreme Lord. The occupational duty of a brahmana is certainly in the
mode of goodness, but if a person is not by nature in the mode of
goodness, he should not imitate the occupational duty of a brahmana.
For a ksatriya, or administrator, there are so many abominable things;
a ksatriya has to be violent to kill his enemies, and sometimes a
ksatriya has to tell lies for the sake of diplomacy. Such violence and
duplicity accompany political affairs, but a ksatriya is not supposed
to give up his occupational duty and try to perform the duties of a
brahmana.
One should act to satisfy the Supreme Lord. For example, Arjuna was a
ksatriya. He was hesitating to fight the other party. But if such
fighting is performed for the sake of Krsna, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, there need be no fear of degradation. In the business field
also, sometimes a merchant has to tell so many lies to make a profit.
If he does not do so, there can be no profit. Sometimes a merchant
says, "Oh, my dear customer, for you I am making no profit," but one
should know that without profit the merchant cannot exist. Therefore it
should be taken as a simple lie if a merchant says that he is not
making a profit. But the merchant should not think that because he is
engaged in an occupation in which the telling of lies is compulsory, he
should give up his profession and pursue the profession of a brahmana.
That is not recommended. Whether one is a ksatriya, a vaisya, or a
sudra doesn't matter, if he serves, by his work, the Supreme



Personality of Godhead. Even brahmanas, who perform different types of
sacrifice, sometimes must kill animals because sometimes animals are
sacrificed in such ceremonies. Similarly, if a ksatriya engaged in his
own occupation kills an enemy, there is no sin incurred. In the Third
Chapter these matters have been clearly and elaborately explained;
every man should work for the purpose of Yajna, or for Visnu, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Anything done for personal sense
gratification is a cause of bondage. The conclusion is that everyone
should be engaged according to the particular mode of nature he has
acquired, and he should decide to work only to serve the supreme cause
of the Supreme Lord.

TEXT 48

saha-jam karma kaunteya
sa-dosam api na tyajet
sarvarambha hi dosena
dhumenagnir ivavrtah

SYNONYMS

saha-jam--born simultaneously; karma--work; kaunteya--O son of Kunti;
sa-dosam--with fault; api--although; na--never; tyajet--to be given up;
sarva-arambhah--any venture; hi--certainly; dosena--with fault;
dhumena--with smoke; agnih--fire; iva--as; avrtah--covered.

TRANSLATION

Every endeavor is covered by some sort of fault, just as fire is
covered by smoke. Therefore one should not give up the work which is
born of his nature, O son of Kunti, even if such work is full of fault.

PURPORT

In conditioned life, all work is contaminated by the material modes of
nature. Even if one is a brahmana, he has to perform sacrifices in
which animal killing is necessary. Similarly, a ksatriya, however pious
he may be, has to fight enemies. He cannot avoid it. Similarly, a
merchant, however pious he may be, must sometimes hide his profit to
stay in business, or he may sometimes have to do business on the black
market. These things are necessary; one cannot avoid them. Similarly,
even though a man is a sudra serving a bad master, he has to carry out
the order of the master, even though it should not be done. Despite
these flaws, one should continue to carry out his prescribed duties,
for they are born out of his own nature.
A very nice example is given herein. Although fire is pure, still there
is smoke. Yet smoke does not make the fire impure. Even though there is
smoke in the fire, fire is still considered to be the purest of all
elements. If one prefers to give up the work of a ksatriya and take up
the occupation of a brahmana, he is not assured that in the occupation
of a brahmana there are no unpleasant duties. One may then conclude
that in the material world no one can be completely free from the
contamination of material nature. This example of fire and smoke is
very appropriate in this connection. When in wintertime one takes a
stone from the fire, sometimes smoke disturbs the eyes and other parts
of the body, but still one must make use of the fire despite disturbing
conditions. Similarly, one should not give up his natural occupation
because there are some disturbing elements. Rather, one should be



determined to serve the Supreme Lord by his occupational duty in Krsna
consciousness. That is the perfectional point. When a particular type
of occupation is performed for the satisfaction of the Supreme Lord,
all the defects in that particular occupation are purified. When the
results of work are purified, when connected with devotional service,
one becomes perfect in seeing the self within, and that is self-
realization.

TEXT 49

asakta-buddhih sarvatra
jitatma vigata-sprhah
naiskarmya-siddhim paramam
sannyasenadhigacchati

SYNONYMS

asakta-buddhih--unattached intelligence; sarvatra--everywhere; jita-
atma--control of the mind; vigata-sprhah--without material desires;
naiskarmya-siddhim--perfection of non-reaction; paramam--supreme;
sannyasena--by the renounced order of life; adhigacchati--attains.

TRANSLATION

One can obtain the results of renunciation simply by self-control and
by becoming unattached to material things and disregarding material
enjoyments. That is the highest perfetional stage of renunciation.

PURPORT

Real renunciation means that one should always think himself part and
parcel of the Supreme Lord. Therefore he has no right to enjoy the
results of his work. Since he is part and parcel of the Supreme Lord,
the results of his work must be enjoyed by the Supreme Lord. This is
actually Krsna consciousness. The person acting in Krsna consciousness
is really a sannyasi, one in the renounced order of life. By such a
mentality, one is satisfied because he is actually acting for the
Supreme. Thus he is not attached to anything material; he becomes
accustomed to not taking pleasure in anything beyond the transcendental
happiness derived from the service of the Lord. A sannyasi is supposed
to be free from the reactions of his past activities, but a person who
is in Krsna consciousness automatically attains this perfection without
even accepting the so-called order of renunciation. This state of mind
is called yogarudha, or the perfectional stage of yoga, as confirmed in
the Third Chapter, yas tv atma-ratir eva syat: one who is satisfied in
himself has no fear of any kind of reaction from his activity.

TEXT 50

siddhim prapto yatha brahma
tathapnoti nibodha me
samasenaiva kaunteya
nistha jnanasya ya para

SYNONYMS

siddhim--perfection; praptah--achieving; yatha--as; brahma--the
Supreme; tatha--so; apnoti--achieves; nibodha--try to understand; me--



from Me; samasena--summarily; eva--certainly; kaunteya--O son of Kunti;
nistha--stage; jnanasya--of knowledge; ya--which; para--transcendental.

TRANSLATION

O son of Kunti, learn from Me in brief how one can attain to the
supreme perfectional stage, Brahman, by acting in the way I shall now
summarize.

PURPORT

The Lord describes for Arjuna how one can achieve the highest
perfectional stage simply by being engaged in his occupational duty,
performing that duty for the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One
attains the supreme stage of Brahman simply by renouncing the result of
his work for the satisfaction of the Supreme Lord. That is the process
of self-realization. Actual perfection of knowledge is in attaining
pure Krsna consciousness; that is described in the following verses.

TEXTS 51-53

buddhya visuddhaya yukto
dhrtyatmanam niyamya ca
sabdadin visayams tyaktva
raga-dvesau vyudasya ca

vivikta-sevi laghv-asi
yata-vak-kaya-manasah
dhyana-yoga-paro nityam
vairagyam samupasritah

ahankaram balam darpam
kamam krodham parigraham
vimucya nirmamah santo
brahma-bhuyaya kalpate

SYNONYMS

buddhya--by the intelligence; visuddhaya--fully purified; yuktah--such
engagement; dhrtya--determination; atmanam--self; niyamya--regulated;
ca--also; sabda-adin--the sense objects, such as sound, etc.; visayan--
sense objects; tyaktva--giving up; raga--attachment; dvesau--hatred;
vyudasya--having laid aside; ca--also; vivikta-sevi--living in a
secluded place; laghu-asi--eating a small quantity; yata-vak--control
of speech; kaya--body; manasah--control of the mind; dhyana-yoga-parah-
-always absorbed in trance; nityam--twenty-four hours a day; vairagyam-
-detachment; samupasritah--taken shelter of; ahankaram--false ego;
balam--false strength; darpam--false pride; kamam--lust; krodham--
anger; parigraham--acceptance of material things; vimucya--being
delivered; nirmamah--without proprietorship; santah--peaceful; brahma-
bhuyaya--to become self-realized; kalpate--is understood.

TRANSLATION

Being purified by his intelligence and controlling the mind with
determination, giving up the objects of sense gratification, being
freed from attachment and hatred, one who lives in a secluded place,
who eats little and who controls the body and the tongue, and is always



in trance and is detached, who is without false ego, false strength,
false pride, lust, anger, and who does not accept material things, such
a person is certainly elevated to the position of self-realization.

PURPORT

When one is purified by knowledge, he keeps himself in the mode of
goodness. Thus one becomes the controller of the mind and is always in
trance. Because he is not attached to the objects of sense
gratification, he does not eat more than what he requires, and he
controls the activities of his body and mind. He has no false ego
because he does not accept the body as himself. Nor has he a desire to
make the body fat and strong by accepting so many material things.
Because he has no bodily concept of life, he is not falsely proud. He
is satisfied with everything that is offered to him by the grace of the
Lord, and he is never angry in the absence of sense gratification. Nor
does he endeavor to acquire sense objects. Thus when he is completely
free from false ego, he becomes nonattached to all material things, and
that is the stage of self-realization of Brahman. That stage is called
the brahma-bhuta stage. When one is free from the material conception
of life, he becomes peaceful and cannot be agitated. This is described
in Bhagavad-gita (2.70):

apuryamanam acala-pratistham
samudram apah pravisanti yadvat
tadvat kama yam pravisanti sarve
sa santim apnoti na kama-kami

"A person who is not disturbed by the incessant flow of desires--that
enter like rivers into the ocean, which is ever being filled but is
always still--can alone achieve peace, and not the man who strives to
satisfy such desires."

TEXT 54

brahma-bhutah prasannatma
na socati na kanksati
samah sarvesu bhutesu
mad-bhaktim labhate param

SYNONYMS

brahma-bhutah--being one with the Absolute; prasanna-atma--fully
joyful; na--never; socati--laments; na--never; kanksati--desires;
samah--equally disposed; sarvesu--all; bhutesu--living entities; mat-
bhaktim--My devotional service; labhate--gains; param--transcendental.

TRANSLATION

One who is thus transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme
Brahman and becomes fully joyful. He never laments or desires to have
anything. He is equally disposed to every living entity. In that state
he attains pure devotional service unto Me.

PURPORT

To the impersonalist, achieving the brahma-bhuta stage, becoming one
with the Absolute, is the last word. But for the personalist, or pure



devotee, one has to go still further to become engaged in pure
devotional service. This means that one who is engaged in pure
devotional service to the Supreme Lord is already in a state of
liberation, called brahma-bhuta, oneness with the Absolute. Without
being one with the Supreme, the Absolute, one cannot render service
unto Him. In the absolute conception, there is no difference between
the served and the servitor; yet the distinction is there, in a higher
spiritual sense.
In the material concept of life, when one works for sense
gratification, there is misery, but in the absolute world, when one is
engaged in pure devotional service, there is no misery. The devotee in
Krsna consciousness has nothing to lament or desire. Since God is full,
a living entity who is engaged in God's service, in Krsna
consciousness, becomes also full in himself. He is just like a river
cleansed of all dirty water. Because a pure devotee has no thought
other than Krsna, he is naturally always joyful. He does not lament for
any material loss or gain, because he is full in the service of the
Lord. He has no desire for material enjoyment because he knows that
every living entity is a fragmental part and parcel of the Supreme Lord
and therefore eternally a servant. He does not see, in the material
world, someone as higher and someone as lower; higher and lower
positions are ephemeral, and a devotee has nothing to do with ephemeral
appearances or disappearances. For him stone and gold are of equal
value. This is the brahma-bhuta stage, and this stage is attained very
easily by the pure devotee. In that stage of existence, the idea of
becoming one with the Supreme Brahman and annihilating one's
individuality becomes hellish, and the idea of attaining the heavenly
kingdom becomes phantasmagoria, and the senses are like broken
serpents' teeth. As there is no fear of a serpent with broken teeth, so
there is no fear from the senses when they are automatically
controlled. The world is miserable for the materially infected person,
but for a devotee the entire world is as good as Vaikuntha, or the
spiritual sky. The highest personality in this material universe is no
more significant than an ant for a devotee. Such a stage can be
achieved by the mercy of Lord Caitanya, who preached pure devotional
service in this age.

TEXT 55

bhaktya mam abhijanati
yavan yas casmi tattvatah
tato mam tattvato jnatva
visate tad-anantaram

SYNONYMS

bhaktya--by pure devotional service; mam--Me; abhijanati--one can know;
yavan--as much as; yah ca asmi--as I am; tattvatah--in truth; tatah--
thereafter; mam--Me; tattvatah--by truth; jnatva--knowing; visate--
enters; tat-anantaram--thereafter.

TRANSLATION

One can understand the Supreme Personality as He is only by devotional
service. And when one is in full consciousness of the Supreme Lord by
such devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of God.

PURPORT



The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, and His plenary portions
cannot be understood by mental speculation nor by the nondevotees. If
anyone wants to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he has
to take to pure devotional service under the guidance of a pure
devotee. Otherwise, the truth of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
will always be hidden. It is already stated in Bhagavad-gita (7.25),
naham prakasah sarvasya: He is not revealed to everyone. No one can
understand God simply by erudite scholarship or mental speculation.
Only one who is actually engaged in Krsna consciousness and devotional
service can understand what Krsna is. University degrees are not
helpful.
One who is fully conversant with the Krsna science becomes eligible to
enter into the spiritual kingdom, the abode of Krsna. Becoming Brahman
does not mean that one loses his identity. Devotional service is there,
and as long as devotional service exists, there must be God, the
devotee, and the process of devotional service. Such knowledge is never
vanquished, even after liberation. Liberation involves getting free
from the concept of material life; in spiritual life the same
distinction is there, the same individuality is there, but in pure
Krsna consciousness. One should not misunderstand that the word visate,
"enters into Me," supports the monist theory that one becomes
homogeneous with the impersonal Brahman. No. Visate means that one can
enter into the abode of the Supreme Lord in his's individuality to
engage in His association and render service unto Him. For instance, a
green bird enters a green tree not to become one with the tree but to
enjoy the fruits of the tree. impersonalists generally give the example
of a river flowing into the ocean and merging. This may be a source of
happiness for the impersonalist, but the personalist keeps his personal
individuality like an aquatic in the ocean. We find so many living
entities within the ocean, if we go deep. Surface acquaintance with the
ocean is not sufficient; one must have complete knowledge of the
aquatics living in the ocean depths.
Because of his pure devotional service, a devotee can understand the
transcendental qualities and the opulences of the Supreme Lord in
truth. As it is stated in the Eleventh Chapter, only by devotional
service can one understand. The same is confirmed here; one can
understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead by devotional service and
enter into His kingdom.
After attainment of the brahma-bhuta stage of freedom from material
conceptions, devotional service begins by one's hearing about the Lord.
When one hears about the Supreme Lord, automatically the brahma-bhuta
stage develops, and material contamination--greediness and lust for
sense enjoyment--disappears. As lust and desires disappear from the
heart of a devotee, he becomes more attached to the service of the
Lord, and by such attachment he becomes free from material
contamination. In that state of life he can understand the Supreme
Lord. This is the statement of Srimad-Bhagavatam also. After liberation
the process of bhakti, or transcendental service, continues. The
Vedanta-sutra (4.1.12) confirms this: a-prayanat tatrapi hi drstam.
This means that after liberation the process of devotional service
continues. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam, real devotional liberation is
defined as the reinstatement of the living entity in his own identity,
his own constitutional position. The constitutional position is already
explained: every living entity is the part-and-parcel fragmental
portion of the Supreme Lord. Therefore his constitutional position is
to serve. After liberation, this service is never stopped. Actual
liberation is getting free from misconceptions of life.



TEXT 56

sarva-karmany api sada
kurvano mad-vyapasrayah
mat-prasadad avapnoti
sasvatam padam avyayam

SYNONYMS

sarva--all; karmani--activities; api--although; sada--always; kurvanah-
-performing; mat--under My; vyapasrayah--protection; mat--My; prasadat-
-mercy; avapnoti--achieves; sasvatam--eternal; padam--abode; avyayam--
imperishable.

TRANSLATION

Though engaged in all kinds of activities, My devotee, under My
protection, reaches the eternal and imperishable abode by My grace.

PURPORT

The word mad-vyapasrayah means under the protection of the Supreme
Lord. To be free from material contamination, a pure devotee acts under
the direction of the Supreme Lord or His representative, the spiritual
master. There is no time limitation for a pure devotee. He is always,
twenty-four hours, one hundred percent engaged in activities under the
direction of the Supreme Lord. To a devotee who is thus engaged in
Krsna consciousness the Lord is very, very kind. In spite of all
difficulties, he is eventually placed in the transcendental abode, or
Krsnaloka. He is guaranteed entrance there; there is no doubt about it.
In that supreme abode, there is no change; everything is eternal,
imperishable and full of knowledge.

TEXT 57

cetasa sarva-karmani
mayi sannyasya mat-parah
buddhi-yogam upasritya
mac-cittah satatam bhava

SYNONYMS

cetasa--by intelligence; sarva-karmani--all kinds of activities; mayi--
unto Me; sannyasya--giving up; mat-parah--My protection; buddhi-yogam--
devotional activities; upasritya--taking shelter of; mat-cittah--
consciousness; satatam--twenty-four hours a day; bhava--just become.

TRANSLATION

In all activities just depend upon Me and work always under My
protection. In such devotional service, be fully conscious of Me.

PURPORT

When one acts in Krsna consciousness, he does not act as the master of
the world. Just like a servant, one should act fully under the
direction of the Supreme Lord. A servant has no individual



independence. He acts only on the order of the master. A servant acting
on behalf of the supreme master has no affection for profit and loss.
He simply discharges his duty faithfully in terms of the order of the
Lord. Now, one may argue that Arjuna was acting under the personal
direction of Krsna, but, when Krsna is not present, how should one act?
If one acts according to the direction of Krsna in this book, as well
as under the guidance of the representative of Krsna, then the result
will be the same. The Sanskrit word mat-parah is very important in this
verse. It indicates that one has no goal in life save and except acting
in Krsna consciousness just to satisfy Krsna. And, while working in
that way, one should think of Krsna only: "I have been appointed to
discharge this particular duty by Krsna." While acting in such a way,
one naturally has to think of Krsna. This is perfect Krsna
consciousness. One should, however, note that after doing something
whimsically he should not offer the result to the Supreme Lord. That
sort of duty is not in the devotional service of Krsna consciousness.
One should act according to the order of Krsna. This is a very
important point. That order of Krsna comes through disciplic succession
from the bona fide spiritual master. Therefore the spiritual master's
order should be taken as the prime duty of life. If one gets a bona
fide spiritual master and acts according to his direction, then his's
perfection of life in Krsna consciousness is guaranteed.

TEXT 58

mac-cittah sarva-durgani
mat-prasadat tarisyasi
atha cet tvam ahankaran
na srosyasi vinanksyasi

SYNONYMS

mat--My; cittah--consciousness; sarva--all; durgani--impediments; mat--
My; prasadat--My mercy; tarisyasi--you will overcome; atha--therefore;
cet--if; tvam--you; ahankarat--by false ego; na--not; srosyasi--do not
hear; vinanksyasi--then lose yourself.

TRANSLATION

If you become conscious of Me, you will pass over all the obstacles of
conditional life by My grace. If, however, you do not work in such
consciousness but act through false ego, not hearing Me, you will be
lost.

PURPORT

A person in full Krsna consciousness is not unduly anxious to execute
the duties of his existence. The foolish cannot understand this great
freedom from all anxiety. For one who acts in Krsna consciousness, Lord
Krsna becomes the most intimate friend. He always looks after His
friend's comfort, and He gives Himself to His friend, who is so
devotedly engaged working twenty-four hours a day to please the Lord.
Therefore, no one should be carried away by the false ego of the bodily
concept of life. One should not falsely think himself independent of
the laws of material nature or free to act. He is already under strict
material laws. But, as soon as he acts in Krsna consciousness, he is
liberated, free from the material perplexities. One should note very
carefully that one who is not active in Krsna consciousness is losing



himself in the material whirlpool, in the ocean of birth and death. No
conditioned soul actually knows what is to be done and what is not to
be done, but a person who acts in Krsna consciousness is free to act
because everything is prompted by Krsna from within and confirmed by
the spiritual master.

TEXT 59

yad ahankaram asritya
na yotsya iti manyase
mithyaisa vyavasayas te
prakrtis tvam niyoksyati

SYNONYMS

yat--therefore; ahankaram--false ego; asritya--taking shelter; na--not;
yotsye--shall fight; iti--thus; manyase--think; mithya esah--this is
all false; vyavasayah te--your determination; prakrtih--material
nature; tvam--you; niyoksyati--will engage you.

TRANSLATION

If you do not act according to My direction and do not fight, then you
will be falsely directed. By your nature, you will have to be engaged
in warfare.

PURPORT

Arjuna was a military man, and born of the nature of the ksatriya.
Therefore his natural duty was to fight. But, due to false ego, he was
fearing that by killing his teacher, grandfather and friends, there
would be sinful reactions. Actually he was considering himself master
of his actions, as if he were directing the good and bad results of
such work. He forgot that the Supreme Personality of Godhead was
present there, instructing him to fight. That is the forgetfulness of
the conditioned soul. The Supreme Personality gives directions as to
what is good and what is bad, and one simply has to act in Krsna
consciousness to attain the perfection of life. No one can ascertain
his destiny as the Supreme Lord can; therefore the best course is to
take direction from the Supreme Lord and act. No one should neglect the
order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead or the order of the
spiritual master who is the representative of God. One should act
unhesitatingly to execute the order of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead--that will keep him safe under all circumstances.

TEXT 60

svabhava-jena kaunteya
nibaddhah svena karmana
kartum necchasi yan mohat
karisyasy avaso 'pi tat

SYNONYMS

svabhava-jena--by one's own nature; kaunteya--O son of Kunti;
nibaddhah--conditioned; svena--by one's own; karmana--activities;
kartum--to do; na--not; icchasi--like; yat--that; mohat--by illusion;
karisyasi--you will act; avasah--imperceptibly; api--even; tat--that.



TRANSLATION

Under illusion you are now declining to act according to My direction.
But, compelled by your own nature, you will act all the same, O son of
Kunti.

PURPORT

If one refuses to act under the direction of the Supreme Lord, then he
is compelled to act by the modes in which he is situated. Everyone is
under the spell of a particular combination of the modes of nature and
is acting in that way. But anyone who voluntarily engages himself under
the direction of the Supreme Lord becomes glorious.

TEXT 61

isvarah sarva-bhutanam
hrd-dese 'rjuna tisthati
bhramayan sarva-bhutani
yantrarudhani mayaya

SYNONYMS

isvarah--the Supreme Lord; sarva-bhutanam--of all living entities; hrt-
dese--in the location of the heart; arjuna--O Arjuna; tisthati--
resides; bhramayan--causing to travel; sarva-bhutani--all living
entities; yantra--machine; arudhani--being so placed; mayaya--under the
spell of material energy.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, O Arjuna, and is
directing the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a
machine, made of the material energy.

PURPORT

Arjuna was not the supreme knower, and his decision to fight or not to
fight was confined to his limited discretion. Lord Krsna instructed
that the individual is not all in all. The Supreme Personality of
Godhead, or He Himself, Krsna, the localized Supersoul, sits in the
heart directing the living being. After changing bodies, the living
entity forgets his past deeds, but the Supersoul, as the knower of the
past, present and future, remains the witness of all his activities.
Therefore all the activities of living entities are directed by this
Supersoul. The living entity gets what he deserves and is carried by
the material body, which is created in the material energy under the
direction of the Supersoul. As soon as a living entity is placed in a
particular type of body, he has to work under the spell of that bodily
situation. A person seated in a high-speed motorcar goes faster than
one seated in a slower car, though the living entities, the drivers,
may be the same. Similarly, by the order of the Supreme Soul, material
nature fashions a particular type of body to a particular type of
living entity to work according to his past desires. The living entity
is not independent. One should not think himself independent of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The individual is always under His



control. Therefore his duty is to surrender, and that is the injunction
of the next verse.

TEXT 62

tam eva saranam gaccha
sarva-bhavena bharata
tat-prasadat param santim
sthanam prapsyasi sasvatam

SYNONYMS

tam--unto Him; eva--certainly; saranam--surrender;  gaccha--go; sarva-
bhavena--in all respects; bharata--O son of Bharata; tat-prasadat--by
His grace; param--transcendental; santim--in peace; sthanam--abode;
prapsyasi--you will get; sasvatam--eternal.

TRANSLATION

O scion of Bharata, surrender unto Him utterly. By His grace you will
attain transcendental peace and the supreme and eternal abode.

PURPORT

A living entity should therefore surrender unto the Supreme Personality
of Godhead who is situated in everyone's heart, and that will relieve
him from all kinds of miseries of this material existence. By such
surrender, one will not only be released from all miseries in this
life, but at the end he will reach the Supreme God. The transcendental
world is described in the Vedic literature (Rg Veda 1.22.20) as tad
visnoh paramam padam. Since all of creation is the kingdom of God,
everything material is actually spiritual, but paramam padam
specifically refers to the eternal abode, which is called the spiritual
sky or Vaikuntha.
In the Fifteenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gita it is stated, sarvasya caham
hrdi sannivistah: the Lord is seated in everyone's heart, so this
recommendation that one should surrender unto the Supersoul sitting
within means that one should surrender unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Krsna. Krsna has already been accepted by Arjuna as the
Supreme. He was accepted in the Tenth Chapter as param brahma param
dhama. Arjuna has accepted Krsna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead
and the supreme abode of all living entities, not only because of his
personal experience but also because of the evidence of great
authorities like Narada, Asita, Devala and Vyasa.

TEXT 63

iti te jnanam akhyatam
guhyad guhyataram maya
vimrsyaitad asesena
yathecchasi tatha kuru

SYNONYMS

iti--thus; te--unto you; jnanam--knowledge; akhyatam--described;
guhyat--confidential; guhya-taram--still more confidential; maya--by
Me; vimrsya--by deliberation; etat--that; asesena--fully; yatha--as
you; icchasi--you like; tatha--that; kuru--perform.



TRANSLATION

Thus I have explained to you the most confidential of all knowledge.
Deliberate on this fully, and then do what you wish to do.

PURPORT

The Lord has already explained to Arjuna the knowledge of brahma-bhuta.
One who is in the brahma-bhuta condition is joyful; he never laments,
nor does he desire anything. That is due to confidential knowledge.
Krsna also discloses knowledge of the Supersoul. This is also Brahman
knowledge, knowledge of Brahman, but it is superior.
Here Lord Krsna tells Arjuna that he can do as he chooses. God does not
interfere with the little independence of the living entity. In
Bhagavad-gita, the Lord has explained in all respects how one can
elevate his living condition. The best advice imparted to Arjuna is to
surrender unto the Supersoul seated within his heart. By right
discrimination, one should agree to act according to the order of the
Supersoul. That will help one become situated constantly in Krsna
consciousness, the highest perfectional stage of human life. Arjuna is
being directly ordered by the Personality of Godhead to fight.
Surrender to the Supreme Personality of Godhead is in the best interest
of the living entities. It is not for the interest of the Supreme.
Before surrendering, one is free to deliberate on this subject as far
as the intelligence goes; that is the best way to accept the
instruction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such instruction
comes also through the spiritual master, the bona fide representative
of Krsna.

TEXT 64

sarva-guhyatamam bhuyah
srnu me paramam vacah
isto 'si me drdham iti
tato vaksyami te hitam

SYNONYMS

sarva-guhya-tamam--the most confidential of all; bhuyah--again; srnu--
just hear; me--from Me; paramam--the supreme; vacah--instruction; istah
asi--you are very dear to Me; me--of Me; drdham--very; iti--thus;
tatah--therefore; vaksyami--I am speaking; te--for your; hitam--
benefit.

TRANSLATION

Because you are My very dear friend, I am speaking to you My supreme
instruction, the most confidential knowledge of all. Hear this from Me,
for it is for your benefit.

PURPORT

The Lord has given Arjuna confidential knowledge of the Supersoul
within everyone's heart, and now He is giving the most confidential
part of this knowledge: just surrender unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. At the end of the Ninth Chapter He has said, man-manah: "Just
always think of Me." The same instruction is repeated here to stress



the essence of the teachings of Bhagavad-gita. This essence is not
understood by a common man, but by one who is actually very dear to
Krsna, a pure devotee of Krsna. This is the most important instruction
in all Vedic literature. What Krsna is saying in this connection is the
most essential part of knowledge, and it should be carried out not only
by Arjuna but by all living entities.

TEXT 65

man-mana bhava mad-bhakto
mad-yaji mam namaskuru
mam evaisyasi satyam te
pratijane priyo 'si me

SYNONYMS

mat-manah--thinking of Me; bhava--just become; mat-bhaktah--My devotee;
mat-yaji--My worshiper; mam--unto Me; namaskuru--offer your obeisances;
mam--unto Me; eva--certainly; esyasi--come; satyam--truly; te--to you;
pratijane--I promise; priyah--dear; asi--you are; me--Mine.

TRANSLATION

Always think of Me and become My devotee. Worship Me and offer your
homage unto Me. Thus you will come to Me without fail. I promise you
this because you are My very dear friend.

PURPORT

The most confidential part of knowledge is that one should become a
pure devotee of Krsna and always think of Him and act for Him. One
should not become an official meditator. Life should be so molded that
one will always have the chance to think of Krsna. One should always
act in such a way that all his daily activities are in connection with
Krsna. He should arrange his life in such a way that throughout the
twenty-four hours he cannot but think of Krsna. And the Lord's promise
is that anyone who is in such pure Krsna consciousness will certainly
return to the abode of Krsna, where he will be engaged in the
association of Krsna face to face. This most confidential part of
knowledge is spoken to Arjuna because he is the dear friend of Krsna.
Everyone who follows the path of Arjuna can become a dear friend to
Krsna and obtain the same perfection as Arjuna.
These words stress that one should concentrate his mind upon Krsna--the
very form with two hands carrying a flute, the bluish boy with a
beautiful face and peacock feathers in His hair. There are descriptions
of Krsna found in the Brahma-samhita and other literatures. One should
fix his mind on this original form of Godhead, Krsna. He should not
even divert his attention to other forms of the Lord. The Lord has
multiforms as Visnu, Narayana, Rama, Varaha, etc., but a devotee should
concentrate his mind on the form that was present before Arjuna.
Concentration of the mind on the form of Krsna constitutes the most
confidential part of knowledge, and this is disclosed to Arjuna because
Arjuna is the most dear friend of Krsna's.

TEXT 66

sarva-dharman parityajya
mam ekam saranam vraja



aham tvam sarva-papebhyo
moksayisyami ma sucah

SYNONYMS

sarva-dharman--all varieties of religion; parityajya--abandoning; mam--
unto Me; ekam--only; saranam--surrender; vraja--go; aham--I; tvam--you;
sarva--all; papebhyah--from sinful reactions; moksayisyami--deliver;
ma--not; sucah--worry.

TRANSLATION

Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall
deliver you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear.

PURPORT

The Lord has described various kinds of knowledge, processes of
religion, knowledge of the Supreme Brahman, knowledge of the Supersoul,
knowledge of the different types of orders and statuses of social life,
knowledge of the renounced order of life, knowledge of nonattachment,
sense and mind control, meditation, etc. He has described in so many
ways different types of religion. Now, in summarizing Bhagavad-gita,
the Lord says that Arjuna should give up all the processes that have
been explained to him; he should simply surrender to Krsna. That
surrender will save him from all kinds of sinful reactions, for the
Lord personally promises to protect him.
In the Seventh Chapter it was said that only one who has become free
from all sinful reactions can take to the worship of Lord Krsna. Thus
one may think that unless he is free from all sinful reactions he
cannot take to the surrendering process. To such doubts it is here said
that even if one is not free from all sinful reactions, simply by the
process of surrendering to Sri Krsna he is automatically freed. There
is no need of strenuous effort to free oneself from sinful reactions.
One should unhesitatingly accept Krsna as the supreme savior of all
living entities. With faith and love, one should surrender unto Him.
According to the devotional process, one should simply accept such
religious principles that will lead ultimately to the devotional
service of the Lord. One may perform a particular occupational duty
according to his position in the social order, but if by executing his
duty one does not come to the point of Krsna consciousness, all his
activities are in vain. Anything that does not lead to the perfectional
stage of Krsna consciousness should be avoided. One should be confident
that in all circumstances Krsna will protect him from all difficulties.
There is no need of thinking how one should keep the body and soul
together. Krsna will see to that. One should always think himself
helpless and should consider Krsna the only basis for his progress in
life. As soon as one seriously engages himself in devotional service to
the Lord in full Krsna consciousness, at once he becomes freed from all
contamination of material nature. There are different processes of
religion and purificatory processes by cultivation of knowledge,
meditation in the mystic yoga system, etc., but one who surrenders unto
Krsna does not have to execute so many methods. That simple surrender
unto Krsna will save him from unnecessarily wasting time. One can thus
make all progress at once and be freed from all sinful reaction.
One should be attracted by the beautiful vision of Krsna. His name is
Krsna because He is all-attractive. One who becomes attracted by the
beautiful, all-powerful, omnipotent vision of Krsna is fortunate. There



are different kinds of transcendentalists--some of them are attached to
the impersonal Brahman vision, some of them are attracted by the
Supersoul feature, etc., but one who is attracted to the personal
feature of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and, above all, one who
is attracted by the Supreme Personality of Godhead as Krsna Himself, is
the most perfect transcendentalist. In other words, devotional service
to Krsna, in full consciousness, is the most confidential part of
knowledge, and this is the essence of the whole Bhagavad-gita. Karma-
yogis, empiric philosophers, mystics, and devotees are all called
transcendentalists, but one who is a pure devotee is the best of all.
The particular words used here, ma sucah, "Don't fear, don't hesitate,
don't worry," are very significant. One may be perplexed as to how one
can give up all kinds of religious forms and simply surrender unto
Krsna, but such worry is useless.

TEXT 67

idam te natapaskaya
nabhaktaya kadacana
na casusrusave vacyam
na ca mam yo 'bhyasuyati

SYNONYMS

idam--this; te--you; na--never; atapaskaya--one who is not austere; na-
-never; abhaktaya--one who is not a devotee; kadacana--at any time; na-
-never; ca--also; asusrusave--one who is not engaged in devotional
service; vacyam--to be spoken; na--never; ca--also; mam--unto Me; yah--
anyone; abhyasuyati--envious.

TRANSLATION

This confidential knowledge may not be explained to those who are not
austere, or devoted, or engaged in devotional service, nor to one who
is envious of Me.

PURPORT

Persons who have not undergone the austerities of the religious
process, who have never attempted devotional service in Krsna
consciousness, who have not tended a pure devotee, and especially those
who are conscious of Krsna as a historical personality or who are
envious of the greatness of Krsna, should not be told this most
confidential part of knowledge. It is, however, sometimes found that
even demoniac persons who are envious of Krsna, worshiping Krsna in a
different way, take to the profession of explaining Bhagavad-gita in a
different way to make business, but anyone who desires actually to
understand Krsna must avoid such commentaries on Bhagavad-gita.
Actually the purpose of Bhagavad-gita is not understandable to those
who are sensuous--even if one is not sensuous but is strictly following
the disciplines enjoined in the Vedic scripture, if he is not a
devotee, he also cannot understand Krsna. Even when one poses himself
as a devotee of Krsna, but is not engaged in Krsna conscious
activities, he also cannot understand Krsna. There are many persons who
envy Krsna because He has explained in Bhagavad-gita that He is the
Supreme and that nothing is above Him or equal to Him. There are many
persons who are envious of Krsna. Such persons should not be told of
Bhagavad-gita, for they cannot understand. There is no possibility of



faithless persons' understanding Bhagavad-gita and Krsna. Without
understanding Krsna from the authority of a pure devotee, one should
not try to comment upon Bhagavad-gita.

TEXT 68

ya idam paramam guhyam
mad-bhaktesv abhidhasyati
bhaktim mayi param krtva
mam evaisyaty asamsayah

SYNONYMS

yah--anyone; idam--this; paramam--most; guhyam--confidential; mat--
Mine; bhaktesu--amongst devotees of; abhidhasyati--explains; bhaktim--
devotional service; mayi--unto Me; param--transcendental; krtva--having
done; mam--unto Me; eva--certainly; esyati--comes; asamsayah--without
doubt.

TRANSLATION

For one who explains the supreme secret to the devotees, devotional
service is guaranteed, and at the end he will come back to Me.

PURPORT

Generally it is advised that Bhagavad-gita be discussed amongst the
devotees only, for those who are not devotees will neither understand
Krsna nor Bhagavad-gita. Those who do not accept Krsna as He is and
Bhagavad-gita as it is should not try to explain Bhagavad-gita
whimsically and become offenders. Bhagavad-gita should be explained to
persons who are ready to accept Krsna as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. It is a subject matter for the devotees only and not for
philosophical speculators. Anyone, however, who tries sincerely to
present Bhagavad-gita as it is will advance in devotional activities
and reach the pure devotional state of life. As a result of such pure
devotion, he is sure to go back home, back to Godhead.

TEXT 69

na ca tasman manusyesu
kascin me priya-krttamah
bhavita na ca me tasmad
anyah priyataro bhuvi

SYNONYMS

na--never; ca--and; tasmat--therefore; manusyesu--among mankind;
kascit--anyone; me--My; priya-krt-tamah--more dear; bhavita--will
become; na--nor; ca--and; me--My; tasmat--than him; anyah--other;
priya-tarah--dearer; bhuvi--in this world.

TRANSLATION

There is no servant in this world more dear to Me than he, nor will
there ever be one more dear.

TEXT 70



adhyesyate ca ya imam
dharmyam samvadam avayoh
jnana-yajnena tenaham
istah syam iti me matih

SYNONYMS

adhyesyate--will study; ca--also; yah--he; imam--this; dharmyam--
sacred; samvadam--conversation; avayoh--of ours; jnana--knowledge;
yajnena--by sacrifice; tena--by him; aham--I; istah--worshiped; syam--
shall be; iti--thus; me--My; matih--opinion.

TRANSLATION

And I declare that he who studies this sacred conversation worships Me
by his intelligence.

TEXT 71

sraddhavan anasuyas ca
srnuyad api yo narah
so 'pi muktah subhal lokan
prapnuyat punya-karmanam

SYNONYMS

sraddha-van--faithful; anasuyah ca--and not envious; srnuyat--does
hear; api--certainly; yah--who; narah--a man; sah--he; api--also;
muktah--being liberated; subhan--auspicious; lokan--planets; prapnuyat-
-attains; punya-karmanam--of the pious.

TRANSLATION

And one who listens with faith and without envy becomes free from
sinful reactions and attains to the planets where the pious dwell.

PURPORT

In the 67th verse of this chapter, the Lord explicitly forbade the
Gita's being spoken to those who are envious of the Lord. In other
words, Bhagavad-gita is for the devotees only. But it so happens that
sometimes a devotee of the Lord will hold open class, and in that class
all the students are not expected to be devotees. Why do such persons
hold open class? It is explained here that although everyone is not a
devotee, still there are many men who are not envious of Krsna. They
have faith in Him as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If such
persons hear from a bona fide devotee about the Lord, the result is
that they become at once free from all sinful reactions and after that
attain to the planetary system where all righteous persons are
situated. Therefore simply by hearing Bhagavad-gita, even a person who
does not try to be a pure devotee attains the result of righteous
activities. Thus a pure devotee of the Lord gives everyone a chance to
become free from all sinful reactions and to become a devotee of the
Lord.
Generally those who are free from sinful reactions, those who are
righteous, very easily take to Krsna consciousness. The word punya-
karmanam is very significant here. This refers to the performance of



great sacrifices. Those who are righteous in performing devotional
service but who are not pure can attain the planetary system of the
polestar, or Dhruvaloka, where Dhruva Maharaja is presiding. He is a
great devotee of the Lord, and he has a special planet which is called
the polestar.

TEXT 72

kaccid etac chrutam partha
tvayaikagrena cetasa
kaccid ajnana-sammohah
pranastas te dhananjaya

SYNONYMS

kaccit--whether; etat--this; srutam--heard; partha--O son of Prtha;
tvaya--by you; eka-agrena--with full attention; cetasa--by the mind;
kaccit--whether; ajnana--ignorant; sammohah--illusion; pranastah--
dispelled; te--of you; dhananjaya--O conqueror of wealth (Arjuna).

TRANSLATION

O conqueror of wealth, Arjuna, have you heard this attentively with
your mind? And are your illusions and ignorance now dispelled?

PURPORT

The Lord was acting as the spiritual master of Arjuna. Therefore it was
His duty to inquire from Arjuna whether he understood the whole
Bhagavad-gita in its proper perspective. If not, the Lord was ready to
re-explain any point, or the whole Bhagavad-gita if so required.
Actually, anyone who hears Bhagavad-gita from a bona fide spiritual
master like Krsna or His representative will find that all his
ignorance is dispelled. Bhagavad-gita is not an ordinary book written
by a poet or fiction writer; it is spoken by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Any person, if he is fortunate enough to hear these teachings
from Krsna or from His bona fide spiritual representative, is sure to
become a liberated person and get out of the darkness of ignorance.

TEXT 73

arjuna uvaca
nasto mohah smrtir labdha
tvat-prasadan mayacyuta
sthito 'smi gata-sandehah
karisye vacanam tava

SYNONYMS

arjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; nastah--dispelled; mohah--illusion; smrtih-
-memory; labdha--regained; tvat-prasadat--by Your mercy; maya--by me;
acyuta--O infallible Krsna; sthitah--situated; asmi--I am; gata--
removed; sandehah--all doubts; karisye--I shall execute; vacanam--
order; tava--Your.

TRANSLATION



Arjuna said: My dear Krsna, O infallible one, my illusion is now gone.
I have regained my memory by Your mercy, and I am now firm and free
from doubt and am prepared to act according to Your instructions.

PURPORT

The constitutional position of a living entity, represented by Arjuna,
is that he has to act according to the order of the Supreme Lord. He is
meant for self-discipline. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu says that the actual
position of the living entity is that of eternal servant of the Supreme
Lord. Forgetting this principle, the living entity becomes conditioned
by material nature, but in serving the Supreme Lord, he becomes the
liberated servant of God. The living entity's constitutional position
is to be a servitor; he has to serve either the illusory maya or the
Supreme Lord. If he serves the Supreme Lord, he is in his normal
condition, but if he prefers to serve the illusory external energy,
then certainly he will be in bondage. In illusion the living entity is
serving in this material world. He is bound by his lust and desires,
yet he thinks of himself as the master of the world. This is called
illusion. When a person is liberated, his illusion is over, and he
voluntarily surrenders unto the Supreme to act according to His
desires. The last illusion, the last snare of maya to trap the living
entity, is the proposition that he is God. The living entity thinks
that he is no longer a conditioned soul, but God. He is so
unintelligent that he does not think that if he were God, then how
could he be in doubt? That he does not consider. So that is the last
snare of illusion. Actually to become free from the illusory energy is
to understand Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and agree to
act according to His order.
The word moha is very important in this verse. Moha refers to that
which is opposed to knowledge. Actually real knowledge is the
understanding that every living being is eternally a servitor of the
Lord, but instead of thinking oneself in that position, the living
entity thinks that he is not a servant, that he is the master of this
material world, for he wants to lord it over the material nature. That
is his illusion. This illusion can be overcome by the mercy of the Lord
or by the mercy of a pure devotee. When that illusion is over, one
agrees to act in Krsna consciousness.
Krsna consciousness is acting according to Krsna's order. A conditioned
soul illusioned by the external energy of matter does not know that the
Supreme Lord is the master who is full of knowledge and who is the
proprietor of everything. Whatever He desires He can bestow upon His
devotees; He is the friend of everyone, and He is especially inclined
to His devotee. He is the controller of this material nature and of all
living entities. He is also the controller of inexhaustible time, and
He is full of all opulences and potencies. The Supreme Personality of
Godhead can even give Himself to the devotee. One who does not know Him
is under the spell of illusion; he does not become a devotee, but a
servitor of maya. Arjuna, however, after hearing Bhagavad-gita from the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, became free from all illusion. He could
understand that Krsna was not only his friend, but the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. And he understood Krsna factually. So to study
Bhagavad-gita is to understand Krsna factually. When a person is in
full knowledge, he naturally surrenders to Krsna. When Arjuna
understood that it was Krsna's plan to reduce the unnecessary increase
of population, he agreed to fight according to Krsna's desire. He again
took up his weapons--his arrows and bow--to fight under the order of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.



TEXT 74

sanjaya uvaca
ity aham vasudevasya
parthasya ca mahatmanah
samvadam imam asrausam
adbhutam roma-harsanam

SYNONYMS

sanjayah uvaca--Sanjaya said; iti--thus; aham--I; vasudevasya--of
Krsna; parthasya--of Arjuna; ca--also; maha-atmanah--two great souls;
samvadam--discussing; imam--this; asrausam--heard; adbhutam--wonder;
roma-harsanam--hair standing on end.

TRANSLATION

Sanjaya said: Thus have I heard the conversation of two great souls,
Krsna and Arjuna. And so wonderful is that message that my hair is
standing on end.

PURPORT

In the beginning of Bhagavad-gita, Dhrtarastra inquired from his
secretary Sanjaya, "What happened in the Battlefield of Kuruksetra?"
The entire study was related to the heart of Sanjaya by the grace of
his spiritual master, Vyasa. He thus explained the theme of the
battlefield. The conversation was wonderful because such an important
conversation between two great souls never took place before and would
not take place again. It is wonderful because the Supreme Personality
of Godhead is speaking about Himself and His energies to the living
entity, Arjuna, a great devotee of the Lord. If we follow in the
footsteps of Arjuna to understand Krsna, then our life will be happy
and successful. Sanjaya realized this, and as he began to understand
it, he related the conversation to Dhrtarastra. Now it is concluded
that wherever there is Krsna and Arjuna, there is victory.

TEXT 75

vyasa-prasadac chrutavan
etad guhyam aham param
yogam yogesvarat krsnat
saksat kathayatah svayam

SYNONYMS

vyasa-prasadat--by the mercy of Vyasadeva; srutavan--heard; etat--this;
guhyam--confidential; aham--I; param--the supreme; yogam--mysticism;
yoga-isvarat--from the master of all mysticism; krsnat--from Krsna;
saksat--directly; kathayatah--speaking; svayam--personally.

TRANSLATION

By the mercy of Vyasa, I have heard these most confidential talks
directly from the master of all mysticism, Krsna, who was speaking
personally to Arjuna.



PURPORT

Vyasa was the spiritual master of Sanjaya, and Sanjaya admits that it
was by his mercy that he could understand the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. This means that one has to understand Krsna not directly but
through the medium of the spiritual master. The spiritual master is the
transparent medium, although it is true that the experience is direct.
This is the mystery of the disciplic succession. When the spiritual
master is bona fide, then one can hear Bhagavad-gita directly, as
Arjuna heard it. There are many mystics and yogis all over the world,
but Krsna is the master of all yoga systems. Krsna's instruction is
explicitly stated in Bhagavad-gita--surrender unto Krsna. One who does
so is the topmost yogi. This is confirmed in the last verse of the
Sixth Chapter. Yoginam api sarvesam.
Narada is the direct disciple of Krsna and the spiritual master of
Vyasa. Therefore Vyasa is as bona fide as Arjuna because he comes in
the disciplic succession, and Sanjaya is the direct disciple of Vyasa.
Therefore by the grace of Vyasa, his senses were purified, and he could
see and hear Krsna directly. One who directly hears Krsna can
understand this confidential knowledge. If one does not come to the
disciplic succession, he cannot hear Krsna; therefore his knowledge is
always imperfect, at least as far as understanding Bhagavad-gita is
concerned.
In Bhagavad-gita, all the yoga systems, karma-yoga, jnana-yoga and
bhakti-yoga, are explained. Krsna is the master of all such mysticism.
It is to be understood, however, that as Arjuna was fortunate enough to
understand Krsna directly, similarly, by the grace of Vyasa, Sanjaya
was also able to hear Krsna directly. Actually there is no difference
between hearing directly from Krsna and hearing directly from Krsna via
a bona fide spiritual master like Vyasa. The spiritual master is the
representative of Vyasadeva also. According to the Vedic system, on the
birthday of the spiritual master, the disciples conduct the ceremony
called Vyasa-puja.

TEXT 76

rajan samsmrtya samsmrtya
samvadam imam adbhutam
kesavarjunayoh punyam
hrsyami ca muhur muhuh

SYNONYMS

rajan--O King; samsmrtya--remembering; samsmrtya--remembering;
samvadam--message; imam--this; adbhutam--wonderful; kesava--Lord Krsna;
arjunayoh--and Arjuna; punyam--pious; hrsyami--taking pleasure; ca--
also; muhuh muhuh--always, repeatedly.

TRANSLATION

O King, as I repeatedly recall this wondrous and holy dialogue between
Krsna and Arjuna, I take pleasure, being thrilled at every moment.

PURPORT

The understanding of Bhagavad-gita is so transcendental that anyone who
becomes conversant with the topics of Arjuna and Krsna becomes
righteous, and he cannot forget such talks. This is the transcendental



position of spiritual life. In other words, one who hears the Gita from
the right source, directly from Krsna, attains full Krsna
consciousness. The result of Krsna consciousness is that one becomes
increasingly enlightened, and he enjoys life with a thrill, not only
for some time, but at every moment.

TEXT 77

tac ca samsmrtya samsmrtya
rupam aty-adbhutam hareh
vismayo me mahan rajan
hrsyami ca punah punah

SYNONYMS

tat--that; ca--also; samsmrtya--remembering; samsmrtya--remembering;
rupam--form; ati--great; adbhutam--wonderful; hareh--of Lord Krsna;
vismayah--wonder; me--my; mahan--great; rajan--O King; hrsyami--
enjoying; ca--also; punah punah--repeatedly.

TRANSLATION

O King, when I remember the wonderful form of Lord Krsna, I am struck
with even greater wonder, and I rejoice again and again.

PURPORT

It appears that Sanjaya also, by the grace of Vyasa, could see the
universal form Krsna exhibited to Arjuna. It is, of course, said that
Lord Krsna had never exhibited such a form before. It was exhibited to
Arjuna only, yet some great devotees could also see the universal form
of Krsna when it was shown to Arjuna, and Vyasa was one of them. He is
one of the great devotees of the Lord, and he is considered to be a
powerful incarnation of Krsna. Vyasa disclosed this to his disciple
Sanjaya, who remembered that wonderful form of Krsna exhibited to
Arjuna and enjoyed it repeatedly.

yatra yogesvarah krsno
yatra partho dhanur-dharah
tatra srir vijayo bhutir
dhruva nitir matir mama

SYNONYMS

yatra--where; yoga-isvarah--the master of mysticism; krsnah--Lord
Krsna; yatra--where; parthah--the son of Prtha; dhanuh-dharah--the
carrier of the bow and arrow; tatra--there; srih--opulence; vijayah--
victory; bhutih--exceptional power; dhruva--certain; nitih--morality;
matih mama--is my opinion.

TRANSLATION

Wherever there is Krsna, the master of all mystics, and wherever there
is Arjuna, the supreme archer, there will also certainly be opulence,
victory, extraordinary power, and morality. That is my opinion.

PURPORT



The Bhagavad-gita began with an inquiry of Dhrtarastra. He was hopeful
of the victory of his sons, assisted by great warriors like Bhisma,
Drona and Karna. He was hopeful that the victory would be on his side.
But, after describing the scene on the battlefield, Sanjaya told the
King, "You are thinking of victory, but my opinion is that where Krsna
and Arjuna are present, there will be all good fortune." He directly
confirmed that Dhrtarastra could not expect victory for his side.
Victory was certain for the side of Arjuna because Krsna was there.
Krsna's acceptance of the post of charioteer for Arjuna was an
exhibition of another opulence. Krsna is full of all opulences, and
renunciation is one of them. There are many instances of such
renunciation, for Krsna is also the master of renunciation.
The fight was actually between Duryodhana and Yudhisthira. Arjuna was
fighting on behalf of his elder brother, Yudhisthira. Because Krsna and
Arjuna were on the side of Yudhisthira, Yudhisthira's victory was
certain. The battle was to decide who would rule the world, and Sanjaya
predicted that the power would be transferred to Yudhisthira. It is
also predicted here that Yudhisthira, after gaining victory in this
battle, would flourish more and more because he was not only righteous
and pious, but he was a strict moralist. He never spoke a lie during
his life.
There are many less intelligent persons who take Bhagavad-gita to be a
discussion of topics between two friends in a battlefield. But such a
book cannot be scripture. Some may protest that Krsna incited Arjuna to
fight, which is immoral, but the reality of the situation is clearly
stated: Bhagavad-gita is the supreme instruction in morality. The
supreme instruction of morality is stated in the Ninth Chapter, in the
thirty-fourth verse: man-mana bhava mad-bhaktah. One must become a
devotee of Krsna, and the essence of all religion is to surrender unto
Krsna, as stated, Sarva-dharman. The instructions of Bhagavad-gita
constitute the supreme process of religion and of morality. All other
processes may be purifying and may lead to this process, but the last
instruction of the Gita is the last word in all morality and religion:
surrender unto Krsna. This is the verdict of the Eighteenth Chapter.
From Bhagavad-gita we can understand that to realize oneself by
philosophical speculation and by meditation is one process, but to
fully surrender unto Krsna is the highest perfection. This is the
essence of the teachings of Bhagavad-gita. The path of regulative
principles according to the orders of social life and according to the
different courses of religion may be a confidential path of knowledge
in as far as the rituals of religion are confidential, but one is still
involved with meditation and cultivation of knowledge. Surrender unto
Krsna in devotional service in full Krsna consciousness is the most
confidential instruction and is the essence of the Eighteenth Chapter.
Another feature of Bhagavad-gita is that the actual truth is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. Absolute Truth is realized in
three features--impersonal Brahman, localized Paramatma, and the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. Perfect knowledge of the
Absolute Truth means perfect knowledge of Krsna. If one understands
Krsna, then all the departments of knowledge are part and parcel of
that understanding. Krsna is transcendental, for He is always situated
in His eternal internal potency. The living entities are manifested and
are divided into two classes, eternally conditioned and eternally
liberated. Such living entities are innumerable, and they are
considered fundamental parts of Krsna. Material energy is manifested
into twenty-four divisions. The creation is effected by eternal time,
and it is created and dissolved by external energy. This manifestation
of the cosmic world repeatedly becomes visible and invisible.



In Bhagavad-gita five principal subject matters have been discussed:
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, material nature, the living
entities, eternal time and all kinds of activities. All of these are
dependent on the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. All conceptions
of the Absolute Truth, namely, impersonal Brahman, localized Paramatma,
or any other transcendental conception, exist within the category of
understanding the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Although
superficially the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the living entity,
material nature and time appear to be different, nothing is different
from the Supreme. But the Supreme is always different from everything.
Lord Caitanya's philosophy is that of "inconceivably one and
different." This system of philosophy constitutes perfect knowledge of
the Absolute Truth.
The living entity in his original position is pure spirit. He is just
like an atomic particle of the Supreme Spirit. The conditioned living
entity, however, is the marginal energy of the Lord; he tends to be in
contact with both the material energy and the spiritual energy. In
other words, the living entity is situated between the two energies of
the Lord, and because he belongs to the superior energy of the Lord, he
has a particle of independence. By proper use of that independence he
comes under the direct order of Krsna. Thus he attains his normal
condition in the pleasure-giving potency.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Eighteenth Chapter of the
Srimad Bhagavad-gita in the matter of its Conclusion--the Perfection of
Renunciation.
